DETAILED CONTENTS.
INTRODUCTION......................................................Pages
1-26

CHAP. I--GENERAL PRINCIPLES OF EXPRESSION.The three chief principles
stated--The first principle--Serviceable actions become habitual in
association with certain states of the mind, and are performed
whether or not of service in each particular case--The force of
habit--Inheritance--Associated habitual movements in man--Reflex
actions--Passage of habits into reflex actions--Associated habitual
movements in the lower animals--Concluding remarks............27-49

CHAP. II--GENERAL PRINCIPLES OF EXPRESSION--_continued_. The
Principle of Antithesis--Instances in the dog and cat--Origin of the
principle--Conventional signs--The principle of antithesis has not
arisen from opposite actions being consciously performed under opposite
impulses..........50-65

CHAP. III--GENERAL PRINCIPLES OF EXPRESSION--_concluded_.
The principle of the direct action of the excited nervous system on the
body, independently of the will and in part of habit--Change of
colour in the hair--Trembling of the muscles--Modified
secretions--Perspiration--Expression of extreme pain--Of rage, great
joy, and terror--Contrast between the emotions which cause and do
not cause expressive movements--Exciting and depressing states of the
mind--Summary............................................ 66-82

CHAP. IV--MEANS OF EXPRESSION. IN ANIMALS. The emission of sounds--Vocal
sounds--Sounds otherwise produced--Erection of the dermal appendages,
hairs, feathers, &c., under the emotions of anger and terror--The
drawing back of the ears as a preparation for fighting, and as an
expression of anger--Erection of the ears and raising the head, a sign
of attention 88-114

CHAP. V.--SPECIAL EXPRESSIONS OF ANIMALS. The Dog, various expressive
movements of--Cats--Horses--Ruminants--Monkeys, their expression of joy
and affection--Of pain--Anger Astonishment and Terror Pages 115-145

CHAP. VI.--SPECIAL EXPRESSIONS OF MAN: SUFFERING AND WEEPING. The
screaming and weeping of infants--Form of features--Age at which weeping
commences--The effects of habitual restraint on weeping--Sobbing--Cause
of the contraction of the muscles round the eyes during screaming--Cause
of the secretion of tears 146-175

CHAP. VII.--LOW SPIRITS, ANXIETY, GRIEF, DEJECTION, DESPAIR. General
effect of grief on the system--Obliquity of the eyebrows under
suffering--On the cause of the obliquity of the eyebrows--On the
depression of the corners of the mouth 176-195

CHAP. VIII.--JOY, HIGH SPIRITS, LOVE, TENDER FEELINGS, DEVOTION.
Laughter primarily the expression of joy--Ludicrous ideas--Movements
of the features during laughter--Nature of the sound produced--The
secretion of tears during loud laughter--Gradation from loud laughter
to gentle smiling--High spirits--The expression of love--Tender
feelings--Devotion 196-219

CHAP. IX.--REFLECTION--MEDITATION--ILL--TEMPER--SULKINESS DETERMINATION.
The act of frowning--Reflection with an effort or with the perception
of something difficult or disagreeable--Abstracted
meditation--Ill-temper--Moroseness--Obstinacy--Sulkiness and
pouting--Decision or determination--The firm closure of the mouth
220-236

CHAP. X.-HATRED AND ANGER. Hatred--Rage, effects of on the
system--Uncovering of the teeth--Rage in the insane--Anger and
indignation--As expressed by the various races of man--Sneering and
defiance--The uncovering of the canine teeth on one side of the face
237-252

CHAP. XI.--DISDAIN--CONTEMPT--DISGUST--GUILT--PRIDE,
ETC.--HELPLESSNESS--PATIENCE--AFFIRMATION AND NEGATION. Contempt, scorn
and disdain, variously expressed--Derisive Smile--Gestures expressive
of contempt--Disgust--Guilt, deceit, pride, etc.--Helplessness or
impotence--Patience--Obstinacy--Shrugging the shoulders common to most
of the races of man--Signs of affirmation and negation 253-277

CHAP. XII.--SURPRISE--ASTONISHMENT--FEAR--HORROR.
Surprise, astonishment--Elevation of the eyebrows--Opening
the mouth--Protrusion of the lips--Gestures accompanying
surprise--Admiration Fear--Terror--Erection of the hair--Contraction of
the platysma muscle--Dilatation of the pupils--horror--Conclusion. Pages
278-308

CHAP. XIII.--SELF-ATTENTION--SHAME--SHYNESS--MODESTY: BLUSHING.
Nature of a blush--Inheritance--The parts of the body most
affected--Blushing in the various races of man--Accompanying
gestures--Confusion of mind--Causes of blushing--Self-attention,
the fundamental element--Shyness--Shame, from broken moral laws and
conventional rules--Modesty--Theory of blushing--Recapitulation 309-346

CHAP. XIV.--CONCLUDING REMARKS AND SUMMARY.
The three leading principles which have determined the chief movements
of expression--Their inheritance--On the part which the will and
intention have played in the acquirement of various expressions--The
instinctive recognition of expression--The bearing of our subject on
the specific unity of the races of man--On the successive acquirement
of various expressions by the progenitors of man--The importance of
expression--Conclusion 347-366

LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS.

    FIG.  PAGE
     1. Diagram of the muscles of the face, from Sir C. Bell     24
     2.   "   "   "   Henle................ 24
     3.   "   "   "   "................ 25
     4 Small dog watching a cat on a table   43
     5 Dog approaching another dog with hostile intentions  52
     6. Dog in a humble and affectionate frame of mind      53
     7. Half-bred Shepherd Dog     54
     8. Dog caressing his master   55
     9. Cat, savage, and prepared to fight   58
     10. Cat in an affectionate frame of mind     59
     11. Sound-producing quills from the tail of the Porcupine   93
     12. Hen driving away a dog from her chickens......98
     13. Swan driving away an intruder.................99
     14. Head of snarling dog.........................117
     15. Cat terrified at a dog.......................125
     16. Cynopithecus niger, in a placid condition....135
     17. The same, when pleased by being caressed.....135
     18. Chimpanzee disappointed and sulky............139
     19. Photograph of an insane woman................296
     20. Terror.......................................299
     21. Horror and Agony.............................306

  Plate I. to face page 147    Plate V. to face page 254.
  "  II.  "   178.      "   VI.  "   264.
  "  III. "   200.      "   VII. "   300.
  "  IV.  "   248.

_N. B_.--Several of the figures in these seven Heliotype Plates
have been reproduced from photographs, instead of from the original
negatives; and they are in consequence somewhat indistinct. Nevertheless
they are faithful copies, and are much superior for my purpose to any
drawing, however carefully executed.




ON THE EXPRESSION OF THE EMOTIONS IN MAN AND ANIMALS.




INTRODUCTION.

MANY works have been written on Expression, but a greater number on
Physiognomy,--that is, on the recognition of character through the study
of the permanent form of the features. With this latter subject I am
not here concerned. The older treatises,[1] which I have consulted, have
been of little or no service to me. The famous 'Conferences'[2] of the
painter Le Brun, published in 1667, is the best known ancient work,
and contains some good remarks. Another somewhat old essay, namely,
the 'Discours,' delivered 1774-1782, by the well-known Dutch anatomist
Camper,[3] can hardly be considered as having made any marked advance in
the subject. The following works, on the contrary, deserve the fullest
consideration.

Sir Charles Bell, so illustrious for his discoveries in physiology,
published in 1806 the first edition, and in the third edition of his
'Anatomy and Philosophy of Expression.'[4] He may with justice be said,
not only to have laid the foundations of the subject as a branch of
science, but to have built up a noble structure. His work is in every
way deeply interesting; it includes graphic descriptions of the various
emotions, and is admirably illustrated. It is generally admitted that
his service consists chiefly in having shown the intimate relation which
exists between the movements of expression and those of respiration. One
of the most important points, small as it may at first appear, is that
the muscles round the eyes are involuntarily contracted during violent
expiratory efforts, in order to protect these delicate organs from the
pressure of the blood. This fact, which has been fully investigated for
me with the greatest kindness by Professors Donders of Utrecht, throws,
as we shall hereafter see, a flood of light on several of the most
important expressions of the human countenance. The merits of Sir C.
Bell's work have been undervalued or quite ignored by several foreign
writers, but have been fully admitted by some, for instance by M.
Lemoine,[5] who with great justice says:--"Le livre de Ch. Bell devrait
etre medite par quiconque essaye de faire parler le visage de l'homme,
par les philosophes aussi bien que par les artistes, car, sous une
apparence plus legere et sous le pretexte de l'esthetique, c'est un
des plus beaux monuments de la science des rapports du physique et du
moral."

From reasons which will presently be assigned, Sir C. Bell did not
attempt to follow out his views as far as they might have been carried.
He does not try to explain why different muscles are brought into action
under different emotions; why, for instance, the inner ends of the
eyebrows are raised, and the corners of the mouth depressed, by a person
suffering from grief or anxiety.

In 1807 M. Moreau edited an edition of Lavater on Physiognomy,[6] in
which he incorporated several of his own essays, containing excellent
descriptions of the movements of the facial muscles, together with
many valuable remarks. He throws, however, very little light on the
philosophy of the subject. For instance, M. Moreau, in speaking of the
act of frowning, that is, of the contraction of the muscle called by
French writers the _soucilier_ (_corrigator supercilii_), remarks with
truth:--"Cette action des sourciliers est un des symptomes les plus
tranches de l'expression des affections penibles ou concentrees." He
then adds that these muscles, from their attachment and position, are
fitted "a resserrer, a concentrer les principaux traits de la _face_,
comme il convient dans toutes ces passions vraiment oppressives
ou profondes, dans ces affections dont le sentiment semble porter
l'organisation a revenir sur elle-meme, a se contracter et a
_s'amoindrir_, comme pour offrir moins de prise et de surface a des
impressions redoutables ou importunes." He who thinks that remarks of
this kind throw any light on the meaning or origin of the different
expressions, takes a very different view of the subject to what I do.

The earliest edition of this work, referred to in the preface to the
edition of 1820 in ten volumes, as containing the observations of M.
Moreau, is said to have been published in 1807; and I have no doubt that
this is correct, because the 'Notice sur Lavater' at the commencement
of volume i. is dated April 13, 1806. In some bibliographical works,
however, the date of 1805--1809 is given, but it seems impossible that
1805 can be correct. Dr. Duchenne remarks ('Mecanisme de la Physionomie
Humaine,'-8vo edit. 1862, p. 5, and 'Archives Generales de Medecine,'
Jan. et Fev. 1862) that M. Moreau "_a compose pour son ouvrage un
article important_," &c., in the year 1805; and I find in volume i. of
the edition of 1820 passages bearing the dates of December 12, 1805, and
another January 5, 1806, besides that of April 13, 1806, above referred
to. In consequence of some of these passages having thus been COMPOSED
in 1805, Dr. Duchenne assigns to M. Moreau the priority over Sir C.
Bell, whose work, as we have seen, was published in 1806. This is a very
unusual manner of determining the priority of scientific works; but such
questions are of extremely little importance in comparison with their
relative merits. The passages above quoted from M. Moreau and from Le
Brun are taken in this and all other cases from the edition of 1820 of
Lavater, tom. iv. p. 228, and tom. ix. p. 279. In the above passage
there is but a slight, if any, advance in the philosophy of the subject,
beyond that reached by the painter Le Brun, who, in 1667, in describing
the expression of fright, says:--"Le sourcil qui est abaisse d'un cote
et eleve de l'autre, fait voir que la partie elevee semble le vouloir
joindre au cerveau pour le garantir du mal que l'ame apercoit, et le
cote qui est abaisse et qui parait enfle,--nous fait trouver dans cet
etat par les esprits qui viennent du cerveau en abondance, comme polir
couvrir l'aine et la defendre du mal qu'elle craint; la bouche fort
ouverte fait voir le saisissement du coeur, par le sang qui se retire
vers lui, ce qui l'oblige, voulant respirer, a faire un effort qui est
cause que la bouche s'ouvre extremement, et qui, lorsqu'il passe par les
organes de la voix, forme un son qui n'est point articule; que si les
muscles et les veines paraissent enfles, ce n'est que par les esprits
que le cerveau envoie en ces parties-la." I have thought the foregoing
sentences worth quoting, as specimens of the surprising nonsense which
has been written on the subject.

'The Physiology or Mechanism of Blushing,' by Dr. Burgess, appeared
in 1839, and to this work I shall frequently refer in my thirteenth
Chapter.

In 1862 Dr. Duchenne published two editions, in folio and octavo, of his
'Mecanisme de la Physionomie Humaine,' in which he analyses by means of
electricity, and illustrates by magnificent photographs, the movements
of the facial muscles. He has generously permitted me to copy as many of
his photographs as I desired. His works have been spoken lightly of, or
quite passed over, by some of his countrymen. It is possible that Dr.
Duchenne may have exaggerated the importance of the contraction of
single muscles in giving expression; for, owing to the intimate manner
in which the muscles are connected, as may be seen in Henle's anatomical
drawings[7]--the best I believe ever published it is difficult to
believe in their separate action. Nevertheless, it is manifest that Dr.
Duchenne clearly apprehended this and other sources of error, and as it
is known that he was eminently successful in elucidating the physiology
of the muscles of the hand by the aid of electricity, it is probable
that he is generally in the right about the muscles of the face. In my
opinion, Dr. Duchenne has greatly advanced the subject by his treatment
of it. No one has more carefully studied the contraction of each
separate muscle, and the consequent furrows produced on the skin. He
has also, and this is a very important service, shown which muscles are
least under the separate control of the will. He enters very little into
theoretical considerations, and seldom attempts to explain why certain
muscles and not others contract under the influence of certain emotions.
A distinguished French anatomist, Pierre Gratiolet, gave a course of
lectures on Expression at the Sorbonne, and his notes were published
(1865) after his death, under the title of 'De la Physionomie et des
Mouvements d'Expression.' This is a very interesting work, full of
valuable observations. His theory is rather complex, and, as far as it
can be given in a single sentence (p. 65), is as follows:--"Il resulte,
de tous les faits que j'ai rappeles, que les sens, l'imagination et la
pensee ellememe, si elevee, si abstraite qu'on la suppose, ne peuvent
s'exercer sans eveiller un sentiment correlatif, et que ce sentiment
se traduit directement, sympathiquement, symboliquement ou
metaphoriquement, dans toutes les spheres des organs exterieurs, qui la
racontent tous, suivant leur mode d'action propre, comme si chacun d'eux
avait ete directement affecte."

Gratiolet appears to overlook inherited habit, and even to some extent
habit in the individual; and therefore he fails, as it seems to me, to
give the right explanation, or any explanation at all, of many gestures
and expressions. As an illustration of what he calls symbolic movements,
I will quote his remarks (p. 37), taken from M. Chevreul, on a man
playing at billiards. "Si une bille devie legerement de la direction
que le joueur pretend zlui imprimer, ne l'avez-vous pas vu cent fois
la pousser du regard, de la tete et meme des epaules, comme si ces
mouvements, purement symboliques, pouvaient rectifier son trajet? Des
mouvements non moins significatifs se produisent quand la bille manque
d'une impulsion suffisante. Et cliez les joueurs novices, ils sont
quelquefois accuses au point d'eveiller le sourire sur les levres des
spectateurs." Such movements, as it appeirs to me, may be attributed
simply to habit. As often as a man has wished to move an object to one
side, he has always pushed it to that side when forwards, he has pushed
it forwards; and if he has wished to arrest it, he has pulled backwards.
Therefore, when a man sees his ball travelling in a wrong direction, and
he intensely wishes it to go in another direction, he cannot avoid, from
long habit, unconsciously performing movements which in other cases he
has found effectual.

As an instance of sympathetic movements Gratiolet gives (p. 212) the
following case:--"un jeune chien A oreilles droites, auquel son maitre
presente de loin quelque viande appetissante, fixe avec ardeur ses yeux
sur cet objet dont il suit tous les mouvements, et pendant que les yeux
regardent, les deux oreilles se portent en avant comme si cet objet
pouvait etre entendu." Here, instead of speaking of sympathy between
the ears and eyes, it appears to me more simple to believe, that as dogs
during many generations have, whilst intently looking at any object,
pricked their ears in order to perceive any sound; and conversely have
looked intently in the direction of a sound to which they may have
listened, the movements of these organs have become firmly associated
together through long-continued habit.

Dr. Piderit published in 1859 an essay on Expression, which I have not
seen, but in which, as he states, he forestalled Gratiolet in many of
his views. In 1867 he published his 'Wissenschaftliches System der Mimik
und Physiognomik.' It is hardly possible to give in a few sentences a
fair notion of his views; perhaps the two following sentences will tell
as much as can be briefly told: "the muscular movements of expression
are in part related to imaginary objects, and in part to imaginary
sensorial impressions. In this proposition lies the key to the
comprehension of all expressive muscular movements." (s. 25) Again,
"Expressive movements manifest themselves chiefly in the numerous and
mobile muscles of the face, partly because the nerves by which they
are set into motion originate in the most immediate vicinity of the
mind-organ, but partly also because these muscles serve to support the
organs of sense." (s. 26.) If Dr. Piderit had studied Sir C. Bell's
work, he would probably not have said (s. 101) that violent laughter
causes a frown from partaking of the nature of pain; or that with
infants (s. 103) the tears irritate the eyes, and thus excite the
contraction of the surrounding in muscles. Many good remarks are
scattered throughout this volume, to which I shall hereafter refer.

Short discussions on Expression may be found in various works, which
need not here be particularised. Mr. Bain, however, in two of his works
has treated the subject at some length. He says,[8] "I look upon the
expression so-called as part and parcel of the feeling. I believe it to
be a general law of the mind that along with the fact of inward feeling
or consciousness, there is a diffusive action or excitement over the
bodily members." In another place he adds, "A very considerable number
of the facts may be brought under the following principle: namely, that
states of pleasure are connected with an increase, and states of pain
with an abatement, of some, or all, of the vital functions." But the
above law of the diffusive action of feelings seems too general to throw
much light on special expressions.

Mr. Herbert Spencer, in treating of the Feelings in his 'Principles of
Psychology' (1855), makes the following remarks:--"Fear, when strong,
expresses itself in cries, in efforts to hide or escape, in palpitations
and tremblings; and these are just the manifestations that would
accompany an actual experience of the evil feared. The destructive
passions are shown in a general tension of the muscular system, in
gnashing of the teeth and protrusion of the claws, in dilated eyes
and nostrils in growls; and these are weaker forms of the actions that
accompany the killing of prey." Here we have, as I believe, the true
theory of a large number of expressions; but the chief interest and
difficulty of the subject lies in following out the wonderfully complex
results. I infer that some one (but who he is I have not been able to
ascertain) formerly advanced a nearly similar view, for Sir C. Bell
says,[9] "It has been maintained that what are called the external signs
of passion, are only the concomitants of those voluntary movements which
the structure renders necessary." Mr. Spencer has also published[10]
a valuable essay on the physiology of Laughter, in which he insists on
"the general law that feeling passing a certain pitch, habitually
vents itself in bodily action," and that "an overflow of nerve-force
undirected by any motive, will manifestly take first the most habitual
routes; and if these do not suffice, will next overflow into the less
habitual ones." This law I believe to be of the highest importance in
throwing light on our subject.'

All the authors who have written on Expression, with the exception of
Mr. Spencer--the great expounder of the principle of Evolution--appear
to have been firmly convinced that species, man of course included,
came into existence in their present condition. Sir C. Bell, being
thus convinced, maintains that many of our facial muscles are "purely
instrumental in expression;" or are "a special provision" for this sole
object.[12] But the simple fact that the anthropoid apes possess the
same facial muscles as we do,[13] renders it very improbable that these
muscles in our case serve exclusively for expression; for no one, I
presume, would be inclined to admit that monkeys have been endowed with
special muscles solely for exhibiting their hideous grimaces. Distinct
uses, independently of expression, can indeed be assigned with much
probability for almost all the facial muscles.

Sir C. Bell evidently wished to draw as broad a distinction as possible
between man and the lower animals; and he consequently asserts that with
"the lower creatures there is no expression but what may be referred,
more or less plainly, to their acts of volition or necessary instincts."
He further maintains that their faces "seem chiefly capable of
expressing rage and fear."[14] But man himself cannot express love and
humility by external signs, so plainly as does a dog, when with drooping
ears, hanging lips, flexuous body, and wagging tail, he meets his
beloved master. Nor can these movements in the dog be explained by acts
of volition or necessary instincts, any more than the beaming eyes and
smiling cheeks of a man when he meets an old friend. If Sir C. Bell had
been questioned about the expression of affection in the dog, he would
no doubt have answered that this animal had been created with special
instincts, adapting him for association with man, and that all further
enquiry on the subject was superfluous.

Although Gratiolet emphatically denies[15] that any muscle has been
developed solely for the sake of expression, he seems never to have
reflected on the principle of evolution. He apparently looks at each
species as a separate creation. So it is with the other writers on
Expression. For instance, Dr. Duchenne, after speaking of the movements
of the limbs, refers to those which give expression to the face, and
remarks:[16] "Le createur n'a donc pas eu a se preoccuper ici des
besoins de la mecanique; il a pu, selon sa sagesse, ou--que l'on me
pardonne cette maniere de parler--par une divine fantaisie, mettre
en action tel ou tel muscle, un seul ou plusieurs muscles a la fois,
lorsqu'il a voulu que les signes caracteristiques des passions, meme les
plus fugaces, lussent ecrits passagerement sur la face de l'homme. Ce
langage de la physionomie une fois cree, il lui a suffi, pour le
rendre universel et immuable, de donner a tout etre humain la faculte
instinctive d'exprimer toujours ses sendments par la contraction des
memes muscles."

Many writers consider the whole subject of Expression as inexplicable.
Thus the illustrious physiologist Muller, says,[17] "The completely
different expression of the features in different passions shows that,
according to the kind of feeling excited, entirely different groups of
the fibres of the facial nerve are acted on. Of the cause of this we are
quite ignorant."

No doubt as long as man and all other animals are viewed as independent
creations, an effectual stop is put to our natural desire to investigate
as far as possible the causes of Expression. By this doctrine, anything
and everything can be equally well explained; and it has proved as
pernicious with respect to Expression as to every other branch of
natural history. With mankind some expressions, such as the bristling of
the hair under the influence of extreme terror, or the uncovering of the
teeth under that of furious rage, can hardly be understood, except
on the belief that man once existed in a much lower and animal-like
condition. The community of certain expressions in distinct though
allied species, as in the movements of the same facial muscles during
laughter by man and by various monkeys, is rendered somewhat more
intelligible, if we believe in their descent from a common progenitor.
He who admits on general grounds that the structure and habits of all
animals have been gradually evolved, will look at the whole subject of
Expression in a new and interesting light.

The study of Expression is difficult, owing to the movements being often
extremely slight, and of a fleeting nature. A difference may be clearly
perceived, and yet it may be impossible, at least I have found it so, to
state in what the difference consists. When we witness any deep emotion,
our sympathy is so strongly excited, that close observation is forgotten
or rendered almost impossible; of which fact I have had many curious
proofs. Our imagination is another and still more serious source of
error; for if from the nature of the circumstances we expect to see
any expression, we readily imagine its presence. Notwithstanding Dr.
Duchenne's great experience, he for a long time fancied, as he states,
that several muscles contracted under certain emotions, whereas he
ultimately convinced himself that the movement was confined to a single
muscle.

In order to acquire as good a foundation as possible, and to ascertain,
independently of common opinion, how far particular movements of the
features and gestures are really expressive of certain states of the
mind, I have found the following means the most serviceable. In the
first place, to observe infants; for they exhibit many emotions, as Sir
C. Bell remarks, "with extraordinary force;" whereas, in after life,
some of our expressions "cease to have the pure and simple source from
which they spring in infancy."[18]

In the second place, it occurred to me that the insane ought to
be studied, as they are liable to the strongest passions, and give
uncontrolled vent to them. I had, myself, no opportunity of doing this,
so I applied to Dr. Maudsley and received from him an introduction
to Dr. J. Crichton Browne, who has charge of an immense asylum near
Wakefield, and who, as I found, had already attended to the subject.
This excellent observer has with unwearied kindness sent me copious
notes and descriptions, with valuable suggestions on many points; and I
can hardly over-estimate the value of his assistance. I owe also, to the
kindness of Mr. Patrick Nicol, of the Sussex Lunatic Asylum, interesting
statements on two or three points.

Thirdly Dr. Duchenne galvanized, as we have already seen, certain
muscles in the face of an old man, whose skin was little sensitive, and
thus produced various expressions which were photographed on a large
scale. It fortunately occurred to me to show several of the best plates,
without a word of explanation, to above twenty educated persons of
various ages and both sexes, asking them, in each case, by what emotion
or feeling the old man was supposed to be agitated; and I recorded their
answers in the words which they used. Several of the expressions were
instantly recognised by almost everyone, though described in not exactly
the same terms; and these may, I think, be relied on as truthful,
and will hereafter be specified. On the other hand, the most widely
different judgments were pronounced in regard to some of them. This
exhibition was of use in another way, by convincing me how easily we
may be misguided by our imagination; for when I first looked through
Dr. Duchenne's photographs, reading at the same time the text, and
thus learning what was intended, I was struck with admiration at the
truthfulness of all, with only a few exceptions. Nevertheless, if I had
examined them without any explanation, no doubt I should have been as
much perplexed, in some cases, as other persons have been.

Fourthly, I had hoped to derive much aid from the great masters in
painting and sculpture, who are such close observers. Accordingly, I
have looked at photographs and engravings of many well-known works; but,
with a few exceptions, have not thus profited. The reason no doubt
is, that in works of art, beauty is the chief object; and strongly
contracted facial muscles destroy beauty.[19] The story of the
composition is generally told with wonderful force and truth by
skilfully given accessories.

Fifthly, it seemed to me highly important to ascertain whether the same
expressions and gestures prevail, as has often been asserted without
much evidence, with all the races of mankind, especially with those who
have associated but little with Europeans. Whenever the same movements
of the features or body express the same emotions in several distinct
races of man, we may infer with much probability, that such expressions
are true ones,--that is, are innate or instinctive. Conventional
expressions or gestures, acquired by the individual during early life,
would probably have differed in the different races, in the same manner
as do their languages. Accordingly I circulated, early in the year
1867, the following printed queries with a request, which has been
fully responded to, that actual observations, and not memory, might be
trusted. These queries were written after a considerable interval of
time, during which my attention had been otherwise directed, and I can
now see that they might have been greatly improved. To some of the later
copies, I appended, in manuscript, a few additional remarks:--

(1.) Is astonishment expressed by the eyes and mouth being opened wide,
and by the eyebrows being raised?

(2.) Does shame excite a blush when the colour of the skin allows it to
be visible? and especially how low down the body does the blush extend?

(3.) When a man is indignant or defiant does he frown, hold his body and
head erect, square his shoulders and clench his fists?

(4) When considering deeply on any subject, or trying to understand any
puzzle, does he frown, or wrinkle the skin beneath the lower eyelids?

(5.) When in low spirits, are the corners of the mouth depressed, and
the inner corner of the eyebrows raised by that muscle which the French
call the "Grief muscle"? The eyebrow in this state becomes slightly
oblique, with a little swelling at the Inner end; and the forehead
is transversely wrinkled in the middle part, but not across the whole
breadth, as when the eyebrows are raised in surprise. (6.) When in good
spirits do the eyes sparkle, with the skin a little wrinkled round and
under them, and with the mouth a little drawn back at the corners?

(7.) When a man sneers or snarls at another, is the corner of the upper
lip over the canine or eye tooth raised on the side facing the man whom
he addresses?

(8) Can a dogged or obstinate expression be recognized, which is chiefly
shown by the mouth being firmly closed, a lowering brow and a slight
frown?

(9.) Is contempt expressed by a slight protrusion of the lips and by
turning up the nose, and with a slight expiration?

(10) Is disgust shown by the lower lip being turned down, the upper
lip slightly raised, with a sudden expiration, something like incipient
vomiting, or like something spit out of the mouth?

(11.) Is extreme fear expressed in the same general manner as with
Europeans?

(12.) Is laughter ever carried to such an extreme as to bring tears into
the eyes?

(13.) When a man wishes to show that he cannot prevent something being
done, or cannot himself do something, does he shrug his shoulders, turn
inwards his elbows, extend outwards his hands and open the palms; with
the eyebrows raised?

(14) Do the children when sulky, pout or greatly protrude the lips?

(15.) Can guilty, or sly, or jealous expressions be recognized? though I
know not how these can be defined.

(16.) Is the head nodded vertically in affirmation, and shaken laterally
in negation?


Observations on natives who have had little communication with Europeans
would be of course the most valuable, though those made on any natives
would be of much interest to me. General remarks on expression are of
comparatively little value; and memory is so deceptive that I earnestly
beg it may not be trusted. A definite description of the countenance
under any emotion or frame of mind, with a statement of the
circumstances under which it occurred, would possess much value.

To these queries I have received thirty-six answers from different
observers, several of them missionaries or protectors of the aborigines,
to all of whom I am deeply indebted for the great trouble which they
have taken, and for the valuable aid thus received. I will specify their
names, &c., towards the close of this chapter, so as not to interrupt my
present remarks. The answers relate to several of the most distinct
and savage races of man. In many instances, the circumstances have been
recorded under which each expression was observed, and the expression
itself described. In such cases, much confidence may be placed in the
answers. When the answers have been simply yes or no, I have always
received them with caution. It follows, from the information thus
acquired, that the same state of mind is expressed throughout the world
with remarkable uniformity; and this fact is in itself interesting
as evidence of the close similarity in bodily structure and mental
disposition of all the races, of mankind.

Sixthly, and lastly, I have attended as closely as I could, to the
expression of the several passions in some of the commoner animals; and
this I believe to be of paramount importance, not of course for deciding
how far in man certain expressions are characteristic of certain states
of mind, but as affording the safest basis for generalisation on the
causes, or origin, of the various movements of Expression. In observing
animals, we are not so likely to be biassed by our imagination; and we
may feel safe that their expressions are not conventional.

From the reasons above assigned, namely, the fleeting nature of some
expressions (the changes in the features being often extremely slight);
our sympathy being easily aroused when we behold any strong emotion,
and our attention thus distracted; our imagination deceiving us, from
knowing in a vague manner what to expect, though certainly few of us
know what the exact changes in the countenance are; and lastly, even our
long familiarity with the subject,--from all these causes combined, the
observation of Expression is by no means easy, as many persons, whom I
have asked to observe certain points, have soon discovered. Hence it is
difficult to determine, with certainty, what are the movements of the
features and of the body, which commonly characterize certain states of
the mind. Nevertheless, some of the doubts and difficulties have, as
I hope, been cleared away by the observation of infants,--of the
insane,--of the different races of man,--of works of art,--and lastly,
of the facial muscles under the action of galvanism, as effected by Dr.
Duchenne.

But there remains the much greater difficulty of understanding the
cause or origin of the several expressions, and of judging whether any
theoretical explanation is trustworthy. Besides, judging as well as we
can by our reason, without the aid of any rules, which of two or more
explanations is the most satisfactory, or are quite unsatisfactory, I
see only one way of testing our conclusions. This is to observe whether
the same principle by which one expression can, as it appears, be
explained, is applicable in other allied cases; and especially, whether
the same general principles can be applied with satisfactory results,
both to man and the lower animals. This latter method, I am inclined to
think, is the most serviceable of all. The difficulty of judging of the
truth of any theoretical explanation, and of testing it by some distinct
line of investigation, is the great drawback to that interest which the
study seems well fitted to excite.

Finally, with respect to my own observations, I may state that they were
commenced in the year 1838; and from that time to the present day, I
have occasionally attended to the subject. At the above date, I was
already inclined to believe in the principle of evolution, or of the
derivation of species from other and lower forms. Consequently, when I
read Sir C. Bell's great work, his view, that man had been created with
certain muscles specially adapted for the expression of his feelings,
struck me as unsatisfactory. It seemed probable that the habit of
expressing our feelings by certain movements, though now rendered
innate, had been in some manner gradually acquired. But to discover how
such habits had been acquired was perplexing in no small degree. The
whole subject had to be viewed under a new aspect, and each expression
demanded a rational explanation. This belief led me to attempt the
present work, however imperfectly it may have been executed.--------

I will now give the names of the gentlemen to whom, as I have said, I am
deeply indebted for information in regard to the expressions exhibited
by various races of man, and I will specify some of the circumstances
under which the observations were in each case made. Owing to the great
kindness and powerful influence of Mr. Wilson, of Hayes Place, Kent, I
have received from Australia no less than thirteen sets of answers to
my queries. This has been particularly fortunate, as the Australian
aborigines rank amongst the most distinct of all the races of man. It
will be seen that the observations have been chiefly made in the south,
in the outlying parts of the colony of Victoria; but some excellent
answers have been received from the north.

Mr. Dyson Lacy has given me in detail some valuable observations, made
several hundred miles in the interior of Queensland. To Mr. R. Brough
Smyth, of Melbourne, I am much indebted for observations made
by himself, and for sending me several of the following letters,
namely:--From the Rev. Mr. Hagenauer, of Lake Wellington, a missionary
in Gippsland, Victoria, who has had much experience with the natives.
From Mr. Samuel Wilson, a landowner, residing at Langerenong, Wimmera,
Victoria. From the Rev. George Taplin, superintendent of the native
Industrial Settlement at Port Macleay. From Mr. Archibald G. Lang, of
Coranderik, Victoria, a teacher at a school where aborigines, old and
young, are collected from all parts of the colony. From Mr. H. B.
Lane, of Belfast, Victoria, a police magistrate and warden, whose
observations, as I am assured, are highly trustworthy. From Mr.
Templeton Bunnett, of Echuca, whose station is on the borders of
the colony of Victoria, and who has thus been able to observe many
aborigines who have had little intercourse with white men. He compared
his observations with those made by two other gentlemen long resident
in the neighbourhood. Also from Mr. J. Bulmer, a missionary in a remote
part of Gippsland, Victoria.

I am also indebted to the distinguished botanist, Dr. Ferdinand Muller,
of Victoria, for some observations made by himself, and for sending me
others made by Mrs. Green, as well as for some of the foregoing letters.

In regard to the Maoris of New Zealand, the Rev. J. W. Stack has
answered only a few of my queries; but the answers have been remarkably
full, clear, and distinct, with the circumstances recorded under which
the observations were made.

The Rajah Brooke has given me some information with respect to the Dyaks
of Borneo.

Respecting the Malays, I have been highly successful; for Mr. F. Geach
(to whom I was introduced by Mr. Wallace), during his residence as a
mining engineer in the interior of Malacca, observed many natives, who
had never before associated with white men. He wrote me two long
letters with admirable and detailed observations on their expression. He
likewise observed the Chinese immigrants in the Malay archipelago.

The well-known naturalist, H. M. Consul, Mr. Swinhoe, also observed
for me the Chinese in their native country; and he made inquiries from
others whom he could trust.

In India Mr. H. Erskine, whilst residing in his official capacity in the
Admednugur District in the Bombay Presidency, attended to the expression
of the inhabitants, but found much difficulty in arriving at any safe
conclusions, owing to their habitual concealment of all emotions in
the presence of Europeans. He also obtained information for me from
Mr. West, the Judge in Canara, and he consulted some intelligent native
gentlemen on certain points. In Calcutta Mr. J. Scott, curator of the
Botanic Gardens, carefully observed the various tribes of men therein
employed during a considerable period, and no one has sent me such full
and valuable details. The habit of accurate observation, gained by his
botanical studies, has been brought to bear on our present subject. For
Ceylon I am much indebted to the Rev. S. O. Glenie for answers to some
of my queries.

Turning to Africa, I have been unfortunate with respect to the negroes,
though Mr. Winwood Reade aided me as far as lay in his power. It would
have been comparatively easy to have obtained information in regard to
the negro slaves in America; but as they have long associated with
white men, such observations would have possessed little value. In the
southern parts of the continent Mrs. Barber observed the Kafirs and
Fingoes, and sent me many distinct answers. Mr. J. P. Mansel Weale also
made some observations on the natives, and procured for me a curious
document, namely, the opinion, written in English, of Christian
Gaika, brother of the Chief Sandilli, on the expressions of his
fellow-countrymen. In the northern regions of Africa Captain Speedy,
who long resided with the Abyssinians, answered my queries partly from
memory and partly from observations made on the son of King Theodore,
who was then under his charge. Professor and Mrs. Asa Gray attended
to some points in the expressions of the natives, as observed by them
whilst ascending the Nile.

On the great American continent Mr. Bridges, a catechist residing
with the Fuegians, answered some few questions about their expression,
addressed to him many years ago. In the northern half of the continent
Dr. Rothrock attended to the expressions of the wild Atnah and Espyox
tribes on the Nasse River, in North-Western America. Mr. Washington
Matthews Assistant-Surgeon in the United States Army, also observed
with special care (after having seen my queries, as printed in the
'Smithsonian Report') some of the wildest tribes in the Western parts
of the United States, namely, the Tetons, Grosventres, Mandans, and
Assinaboines; and his answers have proved of the highest value.

Lastly, besides these special sources of information, I have collected
some few facts incidentally given in books of travels.----

[Illustration: Muscles of the human face. Fig 1-2]

[Illustration: Muscles of the human face. Fig 3]

As I shall often have to refer, more especially in the latter part of
this volume, to the muscles of the human face, I have had a diagram
(fig. 1) copied and reduced from Sir C. Bell's work, and two others,
with more accurate details (figs. 2 and 3), from Herde's well-known
'Handbuch der Systematischen Anatomie des Menschen.' The same letters
refer to the same muscles in all three figures, but the names are given
of only the more important ones to which I shall have to allude. The
facial muscles blend much together, and, as I am informed, hardly appear
on a dissected face so distinct as they are here represented. Some
writers consider that these muscles consist of nineteen pairs, with one
unpaired;[20] but others make the number much larger, amounting even to
fifty-five, according to Moreau. They are, as is admitted by everyone
who has written on the subject, very variable in structure; and Moreau
remarks that they are hardly alike in half-a-dozen subjects.[21] They
are also variable in function. Thus the power of uncovering the canine
tooth on one side differs much in different persons. The power of
raising the wings of the nostrils is also, according to Dr. Piderit,[22]
variable in a remarkable degree; and other such cases could be given.

Finally, I must have the pleasure of expressing my obligations to Mr.
Rejlander for the trouble which he has taken in photographing for me
various expressions and gestures. I am also indebted to Herr Kindermann,
of Hamburg, for the loan of some excellent negatives of crying infants;
and to Dr. Wallich for a charming one of a smiling girl. I have already
expressed my obligations to Dr. Duchenne for generously permitting me
to have some of his large photographs copied and reduced. All these
photographs have been printed by the Heliotype process, and the accuracy
of the copy is thus guaranteed. These plates are referred to by Roman
numerals.

I am also greatly indebted to Mr. T. W. Wood for the extreme pains which
he has taken in drawing from life the expressions of various animals. A
distinguished artist, Mr. Riviere, has had the kindness to give me
two drawings of dogs--one in a hostile and the other in a humble and
caressing frame of mind. Mr. A. May has also given me two similar
sketches of dogs. Mr. Cooper has taken much care in cutting the blocks.
Some of the photographs and drawings, namely, those by Mr. May, and
those by Mr. Wolf of the Cynopithecus, were first reproduced by Mr.
Cooper on wood by means of photography, and then engraved: by this means
almost complete fidelity is ensured.



CHAPTER I. -- GENERAL PRINCIPLES OF EXPRESSION.

The three chief principles stated--The first principle--Serviceable
actions become habitual in association with certain states of the mind,
and are performed whether or not of service in each particular
case--The force of habit--Inheritance--Associated habitual movements in
man--Reflex actions--Passage of habits into reflex actions--Associated
habitual movements in the lower animals--Concluding remarks.


I WILL begin by giving the three Principles, which appear to me to
account for most of the expressions and gestures involuntarily used by
man and the lower animals, under the influence of various emotions and
sensations.[101] I arrived, however, at these three Principles only at
the close of my observations. They will be discussed in the present and
two following chapters in a general manner. Facts observed both with man
and the lower animals will here be made use of; but the latter facts
are preferable, as less likely to deceive us. In the fourth and fifth
chapters, I will describe the special expressions of some of the lower
animals; and in the succeeding chapters those of man. Everyone will thus
be able to judge for himself, how far my three principles throw light on
the theory of the subject. It appears to me that so many expressions are
thus explained in a fairly satisfactory manner, that probably all will
hereafter be found to come under the same or closely analogous heads.
I need hardly premise that movements or changes in any part of the
body,--as the wagging of a dog's tail, the drawing back of a horse's
ears, the shrugging of a man's shoulders, or the dilatation of
the capillary vessels of the skin,--may all equally well serve for
expression. The three Principles are as follows.

I. _The principle of serviceable associated Habits_.--Certain complex
actions are of direct or indirect service under certain states of the
mind, in order to relieve or gratify certain sensations, desires, &c.;
and whenever the same state of mind is induced, however feebly, there
is a tendency through the force of habit and association for the same
movements to be performed, though they may not then be of the least use.
Some actions ordinarily associated through habit with certain states of
the mind may be partially repressed through the will, and in such cases
the muscles which are least under the separate control of the will are
the most liable still to act, causing movements which we recognize as
expressive. In certain other cases the checking of one habitual movement
requires other slight movements; and these are likewise expressive.

II. _The principle of Antithesis_.--Certain states of the mind lead
to certain habitual actions, which are of service, as under our first
principle. Now when a directly opposite state of mind is induced, there
is a strong and involuntary tendency to the performance of movements
of a directly opposite nature, though these are of no use; and such
movements are in some cases highly expressive.

III. _The principle of actions due to the constitution of the Nervous
System, independently from the first of the Will, and independently to
a certain extent of Habit_.--When the sensorium is strongly excited,
nerve-force is generated in excess, and is transmitted in certain
definite directions, depending on the connection of the nerve-cells,
and partly on habit: or the supply of nerve-force may, as it appears, be
interrupted. Effects are thus produced which we recognize as expressive.
This third principle may, for the sake of brevity, be called that of the
direct action of the nervous system.


With respect to our _first Principle_, it is notorious how powerful is
the force of habit. The most complex and difficult movements can in
time be performed without the least effort or consciousness. It is not
positively known how it comes that habit is so efficient in facilitating
complex movements; but physiologists admit[102] "that the conducting
power of the nervous fibres increases with the frequency of their
excitement." This applies to the nerves of motion and sensation, as
well as to those connected with the act of thinking. That some physical
change is produced in the nerve-cells or nerves which are habitually
used can hardly be doubted, for otherwise it is impossible to understand
how the tendency to certain acquired movements is inherited. That they
are inherited we see with horses in certain transmitted paces, such as
cantering and ambling, which are not natural to them,--in the pointing
of young pointers and the setting of young setters--in the peculiar
manner of flight of certain breeds of the pigeon, &c. We have analogous
cases with mankind in the inheritance of tricks or unusual gestures, to
which we shall presently recur. To those who admit the gradual evolution
of species, a most striking instance of the perfection with which the
most difficult consensual movements can be transmitted, is afforded by
the humming-bird Sphinx-moth (_Macroglossa_); for this moth, shortly
after its emergence from the cocoon, as shown by the bloom on its
unruffled scales, may be seen poised stationary in the air, with its
long hair-like proboscis uncurled and inserted into the minute orifices
of flowers; and no one, I believe, has ever seen this moth learning to
perform its difficult task, which requires such unerring aim.

When there exists an inherited or instinctive tendency to the
performance of an action, or an inherited taste for certain kinds of
food, some degree of habit in the individual is often or generally
requisite. We find this in the paces of the horse, and to a certain
extent in the pointing of dogs; although some young dogs point
excellently the first time they are taken out, yet they often associate
the proper inherited attitude with a wrong odour, and even with
eyesight. I have heard it asserted that if a calf be allowed to suck
its mother only once, it is much more difficult afterwards to rear it by
hand.[103] Caterpillars which have been fed on the leaves of one kind
of tree, have been known to perish from hunger rather than to eat the
leaves of another tree, although this afforded them their proper food,
under a state of nature;[104] and so it is in many other cases.

The power of Association is admitted by everyone. Mr. Bain remarks, that
"actions, sensations and states of feeling, occurring together or in
close succession, tend to grow together, or cohere, in such a way that
when any one of them is afterwards presented to the mind, the others are
apt to be brought up in idea."[105] It is so important for our purpose
fully to recognize that actions readily become associated with other
actions and with various states of the mind, that I will give a good
many instances, in the first place relating to man, and afterwards to
the lower animals. Some of the instances are of a very trifling nature,
but they are as good for our purpose as more important habits. It is
known to everyone how difficult, or even impossible it is, without
repeated trials, to move the limbs in certain opposed directions which
have never been practised. Analogous cases occur with sensations, as
in the common experiment of rolling a marble beneath the tips of two
crossed fingers, when it feels exactly like two marbles. Everyone
protects himself when falling to the ground by extending his arms,
and as Professor Alison has remarked, few can resist acting thus, when
voluntarily falling on a soft bed. A man when going out of doors puts
on his gloves quite unconsciously; and this may seem an extremely simple
operation, but he who has taught a child to put on gloves, knows that
this is by no means the case.

When our minds are much affected, so are the movements of our bodies;
but here another principle besides habit, namely the undirected overflow
of nerve-force, partially comes into play. Norfolk, in speaking of
Cardinal Wolsey, says--

    "Some strange commotion
     Is in his brain; he bites his lip and starts;
     Stops on a sudden, looks upon the ground,
     Then, lays his finger on his temple: straight,
     Springs out into fast gait; then, stops again,
     Strikes his breast hard; and anon, he casts
     His eye against the moon: in most strange postures
     We have seen him set himself."--_Hen. VIII_., act 3, sc. 2.


A vulgar man often scratches his head when perplexed in mind; and I
believe that he acts thus from habit, as if he experienced a slightly
uncomfortable bodily sensation, namely, the itching of his head, to
which he is particularly liable, and which he thus relieves. Another man
rubs his eyes when perplexed, or gives a little cough when embarrassed,
acting in either case as if he felt a slightly uncomfortable sensation
in his eyes or windpipe.[106]

From the continued use of the eyes, these organs are especially liable
to be acted on through association under various states of the mind,
although there is manifestly nothing to be seen. A man, as Gratiolet
remarks, who vehemently rejects a proposition, will almost certainly
shut his eyes or turn away his face; but if he accepts the proposition,
he will nod his head in affirmation and open his eyes widely. The man
acts in this latter case as if he clearly saw the thing, and in the
former case as if he did not or would not see it. I have noticed that
persons in describing a horrid sight often shut their eyes momentarily
and firmly, or shake their heads, as if not to see or to drive away
something disagreeable; and I have caught myself, when thinking in the
dark of a horrid spectacle, closing my eyes firmly. In looking suddenly
at any object, or in looking all around, everyone raises his eyebrows,
so that the eyes may be quickly and widely opened; and Duchenne remarks
that[107] a person in trying to remember something often raises his
eyebrows, as if to see it. A Hindoo gentleman made exactly the same
remark to Mr. Erskine in regard to his countrymen. I noticed a young
lady earnestly trying to recollect a painter's name, and she first
looked to one corner of the ceiling and then to the opposite corner,
arching the one eyebrow on that side; although, of course, there was
nothing to be seen there.

In most of the foregoing cases, we can understand how the associated
movements were acquired through habit; but with some individuals,
certain strange gestures or tricks have arisen in association with
certain states of the mind, owing to wholly inexplicable causes, and are
undoubtedly inherited. I have elsewhere given one instance from my own
observation of an extraordinary and complex gesture, associated with
pleasurable feelings, which was transmitted from a father to his
daughter, as well as some other analogous facts.[108]

Another curious instance of an odd inherited movement, associated
with the wish to obtain an object, will be given in the course of this
volume.

There are other actions which are commonly performed under certain
circumstances, independently of habit, and which seem to be due to
imitation or some sort of sympathy. Thus persons cutting anything with a
pair of scissors may be seen to move their jaws simultaneously with the
blades of the scissors. Children learning to write often twist about
their tongues as their fingers move, in a ridiculous fashion. When a
public singer suddenly becomes a little hoarse, many of those present
may be heard, as I have been assured by a gentleman on whom I can rely,
to clear their throats; but here habit probably comes into play, as we
clear our own throats under similar circumstances. I have also been told
that at leaping matches, as the performer makes his spring, many of
the spectators, generally men and boys, move their feet; but here again
habit probably comes into play, for it is very doubtful whether women
would thus act.

_Reflex actions_--Reflex actions, in the strict sense of the term,
are due to the excitement of a peripheral nerve, which transmits its
influence to certain nerve-cells, and these in their turn excite certain
muscles or glands into action; and all this may take place without any
sensation or consciousness on our part, though often thus accompanied.
As many reflex actions are highly expressive, the subject must here
be noticed at some little length. We shall also see that some of them
graduate into, and can hardly be distinguished from actions which have
arisen through habit? Coughing and sneezing are familiar instances of
reflex actions. With infants the first act of respiration is often a
sneeze, although this requires the co-ordinated movement of numerous
muscles. Respiration is partly voluntary, but mainly reflex, and is
performed in the most natural and best manner without the interference
of the will. A vast number of complex movements are reflex. As good an
instance as can be given is the often-quoted one of a decapitated
frog, which cannot of course feel, and cannot consciously perform, any
movement. Yet if a drop of acid be placed on the lower surface of the
thigh of a frog in this state, it will rub off the drop with the upper
surface of the foot of the same leg. If this foot be cut off, it cannot
thus act. "After some fruitless efforts, therefore, it gives up trying
in that way, seems restless, as though, says Pfluger, it was seeking
some other way, and at last it makes use of the foot of the other leg
and succeeds in rubbing off the acid. Notably we have here not merely
contractions of muscles, but combined and harmonized contractions in
due sequence for a special purpose. These are actions that have all the
appearance of being guided by intelligence and instigated by will in
an animal, the recognized organ of whose intelligence and will has been
removed."[110]

We see the difference between reflex and voluntary movements in very
young children not being able to perform, as I am informed by Sir
Henry Holland, certain acts somewhat analogous to those of sneezing and
coughing, namely, in their not being able to blow their noses (i. e. to
compress the nose and blow violently through the passage), and in their
not being able to clear their throats of phlegm. They have to learn to
perform these acts, yet they are performed by us, when a little older,
almost as easily as reflex actions. Sneezing and coughing, however,
can be controlled by the will only partially or not at all; whilst
the clearing the throat and blowing the nose are completely under our
command.

When we are conscious of the presence of an irritating particle in our
nostrils or windpipe--that is, when the same sensory nerve-cells are
excited, as in the case of sneezing and coughing--we can voluntarily
expel the particle by forcibly driving air through these passages; but
we cannot do this with nearly the same force, rapidity, and precision,
as by a reflex action. In this latter case the sensory nerve-cells
apparently excite the motor nerve-cells without any waste of power
by first communicating with the cerebral hemispheres--the seat of our
consciousness and volition. In all cases there seems to exist a profound
antagonism between the same movements, as directed by the will and by a
reflex stimulant, in the force with which they are performed and in
the facility with which they are excited. As Claude Bernard asserts,
"L'influence du cerveau tend donc a entraver les mouvements reflexes, a
limiter leur force et leur etendue."[111]

The conscious wish to perform a reflex action sometimes stops or
interrupts its performance, though the proper sensory nerves may be
stimulated. For instance, many years ago I laid a small wager with a
dozen young men that they would not sneeze if they took snuff, although
they all declared that they invariably did so; accordingly they all took
a pinch, but from wishing much to succeed, not one sneezed, though their
eyes watered, and all, without exception, had to pay me the wager. Sir
H. Holland remarks[112] that attention paid to the act of swallowing
interferes with the proper movements; from which it probably follows, at
least in part, that some persons find it so difficult to swallow a pill.

Another familiar instance of a reflex action is the involuntary closing
of the eyelids when the surface of the eye is touched. A similar winking
movement is caused when a blow is directed towards the face; but this
is an habitual and not a strictly reflex action, as the stimulus is
conveyed through the mind and not by the excitement of a peripheral
nerve. The whole body and head are generally at the same time drawn
suddenly backwards. These latter movements, however, can be prevented,
if the danger does not appear to the imagination imminent; but our
reason telling us that there is no danger does not suffice. I may
mention a trifling fact, illustrating this point, and which at the time
amused me. I put my face close to the thick glass-plate in front of a
puff-adder in the Zoological Gardens, with the firm determination of not
starting back if the snake struck at me; but, as soon as the blow was
struck, my resolution went for nothing, and I jumped a yard or two
backwards with astonishing rapidity. My will and reason were powerless
against the imagination of a danger which had never been experienced.

The violence of a start seems to depend partly on the vividness of the
imagination, and partly on the condition, either habitual or temporary,
of the nervous system. He who will attend to the starting of his horse,
when tired and fresh, will perceive how perfect is the gradation from a
mere glance at some unexpected object, with a momentary doubt whether it
is dangerous, to a jump so rapid and violent, that the animal probably
could not voluntarily whirl round in so rapid a manner. The nervous
system of a fresh and highly-fed horse sends its order to the motory
system so quickly, that no time is allowed for him to consider whether
or not the danger is real. After one violent start, when he is excited
and the blood flows freely through his brain, he is very apt to start
again; and so it is, as I have noticed, with young infants.

A start from a sudden noise, when the stimulus is conveyed through
the auditory nerves, is always accompanied in grown-up persons by the
winking of the eyelids.[113] I observed, however, that though my infants
started at sudden sounds, when under a fortnight old, they certainly did
not always wink their eyes, and I believe never did so. The start of an
older infant apparently represents a vague catching hold of something to
prevent falling. I shook a pasteboard box close before the eyes of one
of my infants, when 114 days old, and it did not in the least wink; but
when I put a few comfits into the box, holding it in the same position
as before, and rattled them, the child blinked its eyes violently
every time, and started a little. It was obviously impossible that a
carefully-guarded infant could have learnt by experience that a rattling
sound near its eyes indicated danger to them. But such experience
will have been slowly gained at a later age during a long series of
generations; and from what we know of inheritance, there is nothing
improbable in the transmission of a habit to the offspring at an earlier
age than that at which it was first acquired by the parents.

From the foregoing remarks it seems probable that some actions, which
were at first performed consciously, have become through habit and
association converted into reflex actions, and are now so firmly fixed
and inherited, that they are performed, even when not of the least
use,[114] as often as the same causes arise, which originally excited
them in us through the volition. In such cases the sensory nerve-cells
excite the motor cells, without first communicating with those cells
on which our consciousness and volition depend. It is probable
that sneezing and coughing were originally acquired by the habit of
expelling, as violently as possible, any irritating particle from the
sensitive air-passages. As far as time is concerned, there has been more
than enough for these habits to have become innate or converted into
reflex actions; for they are common to most or all of the higher
quadrupeds, and must therefore have been first acquired at a very remote
period. Why the act of clearing the throat is not a reflex action, and
has to be learnt by our children, I cannot pretend to say; but we can
see why blowing the nose on a handkerchief has to be learnt.

It is scarcely credible that the movements of a headless frog, when
it wipes off a drop of acid or other object from its thigh, and which
movements are so well coordinated for a special purpose, were not at
first performed voluntarily, being afterwards rendered easy through
long-continued habit so as at last to be performed unconsciously, or
independently of the cerebral hemispheres.

So again it appears probable that starting was originally acquired by
the habit of jumping away as quickly as possible from danger, whenever
any of our senses gave us warning. Starting, as we have seen, is
accompanied by the blinking of the eyelids so as to protect the eyes,
the most tender and sensitive organs of the body; and it is, I believe,
always accompanied by a sudden and forcible inspiration, which is the
natural preparation for any violent effort. But when a man or horse
starts, his heart beats wildly against his ribs, and here it may be
truly said we have an organ which has never been under the control of
the will, partaking in the general reflex movements of the body. To this
point, however, I shall return in a future chapter.

The contraction of the iris, when the retina is stimulated by a bright
light, is another instance of a movement, which it appears cannot
possibly have been at first voluntarily performed and then fixed by
habit; for the iris is not known to be under the conscious control of
the will in any animal. In such cases some explanation, quite distinct
from habit, will have to be discovered. The radiation of nerve-force
from strongly-excited nerve-cells to other connected cells, as in the
case of a bright light on the retina causing a sneeze, may perhaps aid
us in understanding how some reflex actions originated. A radiation of
nerve-force of this kind, if it caused a movement tending to lessen
the primary irritation, as in the case of the contraction of the iris
preventing too much light from falling on the retina, might afterwards
have been taken advantage of and modified for this special purpose.

It further deserves notice that reflex actions are in all probability
liable to slight variations, as are all corporeal structures and
instincts; and any variations which were beneficial and of sufficient
importance, would tend to be preserved and inherited. Thus reflex
actions, when once gained for one purpose, might afterwards be modified
independently of the will or habit, so as to serve for some distinct
purpose. Such cases would be parallel with those which, as we have every
reason to believe, have occurred with many instincts; for although
some instincts have been developed simply through long-continued and
inherited habit, other highly complex ones have been developed through
the preservation of variations of pre-existing instincts--that is,
through natural selection.

I have discussed at some little length, though as I am well aware, in a
very imperfect manner, the acquirement of reflex actions, because they
are often brought into play in connection with movements expressive of
our emotions; and it was necessary to show that at least some of them
might have been Erst acquired through the will in order to satisfy a
desire, or to relieve a disagreeable sensation.

_Associated habitual movements in the lower animals_.--I have already
given in the case of Man several instances of movements associated with
various states of the mind or body, which are now purposeless, but
which were originally of use, and are still of use under certain
circumstances. As this subject is very important for us, I will here
give a considerable number of analogous facts, with reference to
animals; although many of them are of a very trifling nature. My object
is to show that certain movements were originally performed for a
definite end, and that, under nearly the same circumstances, they are
still pertinaciously performed through habit when not of the least use.
That the tendency in most of the following cases is inherited, we may
infer from such actions being performed in the same manner by all the
individuals, young and old, of he same species. We shall also see
that they are excited by the most diversified, often circuitous, and
sometimes mistaken associations.

Dogs, when they wish to go to sleep on a carpet or other hard surface,
generally turn round and round and scratch the ground with their
fore-paws in a senseless manner, as if they intended to trample down the
grass and scoop out a hollow, as no doubt their wild parents did, when
they lived on open grassy plains or in the woods. Jackals, fennecs, and
other allied animals in the Zoological Gardens, treat their straw in
this manner; but it is a rather odd circumstance that the keepers, after
observing for some months, have never seen the wolves thus behave. A
semi-idiotic dog--and an animal in this condition would be particularly
liable to follow a senseless habit--was observed by a friend to turn
completely round on a carpet thirteen times before going to sleep.


Many carnivorous animals, as they crawl towards their prey and prepare
to rush or spring on it, lower their heads and crouch, partly, as it
would appear, to hide themselves, and partly to get ready for their
rush; and this habit in an exaggerated form has become hereditary in our
pointers and setters. Now I have noticed scores of times that when two
strange dogs meet on an open road, the one which first sees the other,
though at the distance of one or two hundred yards, after the first
glance always lowers its bead, generally crouches a little, or even lies
down; that is, he takes the proper attitude for concealing himself and
for making a rush or spring although the road
is quite open and the distance great. Again, dogs of
all kinds when intently watching and slowly approaching their prey,
frequently keep one of their fore-legs doubled up for a long time, ready
for the next cautious step; and this is eminently characteristic of the
pointer. But from habit they behave in exactly the same manner whenever
their attention is aroused (fig. 4). I have seen a dog at the foot of a
high wall, listening attentively to a sound on the opposite side, with
one leg doubled up; and in this case there could have been no intention
of making a cautious approach.

[Illustration: Small dog watching a cat on a table. Figure 4]

{illust. caption = for making a rush or FIG. 4.--Small dog watching a
cat on a table. From a photograph taken  by Mr. Rejlander.}

Dogs after voiding their excrement often make with all four feet a
few scratches backwards, even on a bare stone pavement, as if for the
purpose of covering up their excrement with earth, in nearly the same
manner as do cats. Wolves and jackals behave in the Zoological Gardens
in exactly the same manner, yet, as I am assured by the keepers, neither
wolves, jackals, nor foxes, when they have the means of doing so, ever
cover up their excrement, any more than do dogs. All these animals,
however, bury superfluous food. Hence, if we rightly understand the
meaning of the above cat-like habit, of which there can be little
doubt, we have a purposeless remnant of an habitual movement, which was
originally followed by some remote progenitor of the dog-genus for a
definite purpose, and which has been retained for a prodigious length of
time.

Dogs and jackals[115] take much pleasure in rolling and rubbing their
necks and backs on carrion. The odour seems delightful to them, though
dogs at least do not eat carrion. Mr. Bartlett has observed wolves for
me, and has given them carrion, but has never seen them roll on it. I
have heard it remarked, and I believe it to be true, that the larger
dogs, which are probably descended from wolves, do not so often roll in
carrion as do smaller dogs, which are probably descended from jackals.
When a piece of brown biscuit is offered to a terrier of mine and she is
not hungry (and I have heard of similar instances), she first tosses
it about and worries it, as if it were a rat or other prey; she then
repeatedly rolls on it precisely as if it were a piece of carrion, and
at last eats it. It would appear that an imaginary relish has to be
given to the distasteful morsel; and to effect this the dog acts in
his habitual manner, as if the biscuit was a live animal or smelt like
carrion, though he knows better than we do that this is not the case.
I have seen this same terrier act in the same manner after killing a
little bird or mouse.

Dogs scratch themselves by a rapid movement of one of their hind-feet;
and when their backs are rubbed with a stick, so strong is the habit,
that they cannot help rapidly scratching the air or the ground in a
useless and ludicrous manner. The terrier just alluded to, when thus
scratched with a stick, will sometimes show her delight by another
habitual movement, namely, by licking the air as if it were my hand.

Horses scratch themselves by nibbling those parts of their bodies which
they can reach with their teeth; but more commonly one horse shows
another where he wants to be scratched, and they then nibble each other.
A friend whose attention I had called to the subject, observed that when
he rubbed his horse's neck, the animal protruded his head, uncovered his
teeth, and moved his jaws, exactly as if nibbling another horse's
neck, for he could never have nibbled his own neck. If a horse is much
tickled, as when curry-combed, his wish to bite something becomes so
intolerably strong, that he will clatter his teeth together, and though
not vicious, bite his groom. At the same time from habit he closely
depresses his ears, so as to protect them from being bitten, as if he
were fighting with another horse.

A horse when eager to start on a journey makes the nearest approach
which he can to the habitual movement of progression by pawing the
ground. Now when horses in their stalls are about to be fed and are
eager for their corn, they paw the pavement or the straw. Two of
my horses thus behave when they see or hear the corn given to
their neighbours. But here we have what may almost be called a true
expression, as pawing the ground is universally recognized as a sign of
eagerness.

Cats cover up their excrements of both kinds with earth; and my
grandfather[117]{sic} saw a kitten scraping ashes over a spoonful of
pure water spilt on the hearth; so that here an habitual or instinctive
action was falsely excited, not by a previous act or by odour, but by
eyesight. It is well known that cats dislike wetting their feet, owing,
it is probable, to their having aboriginally inhabited the dry country
of Egypt; and when they wet their feet they shake them violently. My
daughter poured some water into a glass close to the head of a kitten;
and it immediately shook its feet in the usual manner; so that here we
have an habitual movement falsely excited by an associated sound instead
of by the sense of touch.

Kittens, puppies, young pigs and probably many other young animals,
alternately push with their forefeet against the mammary glands of their
mothers, to excite a freer secretion of milk, or to make it flow. Now it
is very common with young cats, and not at all rare with old cats of
the common and Persian breeds (believed by some naturalists to be
specifically extinct), when comfortably lying on a warm shawl or
other soft substance, to pound it quietly and alternately with their
fore-feet; their toes being spread out and claws slightly protruded,
precisely as when sucking their mother. That it is the same movement is
clearly shown by their often at the same time taking a bit of the shawl
into their mouths and sucking it; generally closing their eyes and
purring from delight. This curious movement is commonly excited only in
association with the sensation of a warm soft surface; but I have seen
an old cat, when pleased by having its back scratched, pounding the air
with its feet in the same manner; so that this action has almost become
the expression of a pleasurable sensation.

Having referred to the act of sucking, I may add that this complex
movement, as well as the alternate protrusion of the fore-feet, are
reflex actions; for they are performed if a finger moistened with milk
is placed in the mouth of a puppy, the front part of whose brain has
been removed.[117] It has recently been stated in France, that the
action of sucking is excited solely through the sense of smell, so that
if the olfactory nerves of a puppy are destroyed, it never sucks. In
like manner the wonderful power which a chicken possesses only a few
hours after being hatched, of picking up small particles of food,
seems to be started into action through the sense of hearing; for with
chickens hatched by artificial heat, a good observer found that "making
a noise with the finger-nail against a board, in imitation of the
hen-mother, first taught them to peck at their meat."[118]

I will give only one other instance of an habitual and purposeless
movement. The Sheldrake (_Tadorna_) feeds on the sands left uncovered
by the tide, and when a worm-cast is discovered, "it begins patting the
ground with its feet, dancing as it were, over the hole;" and this makes
the worm come to the surface. Now Mr. St. John says, that when his tame
Sheldrakes "came to ask for food, they patted the ground in an impatient
and rapid manner."[119] This therefore may almost be considered as their
expression of hunger. Mr. Bartlett informs me that the Flamingo and the
Kagu (_Rhinochetus jubatus_) when anxious to be fed, beat the ground
with their feet in the same odd manner. So again Kingfishers, when they
catch a fish, always beat it until it is killed; and in the Zoological
Gardens they always beat the raw meat, with which they are sometimes
fed, before devouring it.

We have now, I think, sufficiently shown the truth of our first
Principle, namely, that when any sensation, desire, dislike, &c., has
led during a long series of generations to some voluntary movement,
then a tendency to the performance of a similar movement will almost
certainly be excited, whenever the same, or any analogous or associated
sensation &c., although very weak, is experienced; notwithstanding that
the movement in this case may not be of the least use. Such habitual
movements are often, or generally inherited; and they then differ but
little from reflex actions. When we treat of the special expressions
of man, the latter part of our first Principle, as given at the
commencement of this chapter, will be seen to hold good; namely, that
when movements, associated through habit with certain states of the
mind, are partially repressed by the will, the strictly involuntary
muscles, as well as those which are least under the separate control
of the will, are liable still to act; and their action is often highly
expressive. Conversely, when the will is temporarily or permanently
weakened, the voluntary muscles fail before the involuntary. It is a
fact familiar to pathologists, as Sir C. Bell remarks,[120] "that when
debility arises from affection of the brain, the influence is greatest
on those muscles which are, in their natural condition, most under the
command of the will." We shall, also, in our future chapters, consider
another proposition included in our first Principle; namely, that
the checking of one habitual movement sometimes requires other slight
movements; these latter serving as a means of expression.



CHAPTER II. -- GENERAL PRINCIPLES OF EXPRESSION--_continued_.

The Principle of Antithesis--Instances in the dog and cat--Origin of
the principle--Conventional signs--The principle of antithesis has not
arisen from opposite actions being consciously performed under opposite
impulses.


WE will now consider our second Principle, that of Antithesis. Certain
states of the mind lead, as we have seen in the last chapter, to certain
habitual movements which were primarily, or may still be, of service;
and we shall find that when a directly opposite state of mind is
induced, there is a strong and involuntary tendency to the performance
of movements of a directly opposite nature, though these have never been
of any service. A few striking instances of antithesis will be given,
when we treat of the special expressions of man; but as, in these
cases, we are particularly liable to confound conventional or artificial
gestures and expressions with those which are innate or universal, and
which alone deserve to rank as true expressions, I will in the present
chapter almost confine myself to the lower animals.

[Illustration: Dog in a hostile frame of mind.  Fig. 5]

[Illustration:   Fig. 6]

[Illustration: Dog in a hostile frame of mind.  Fig. 7]


When a dog approaches a strange dog or man in a savage or hostile frame
of mind be walks upright and very stiffly; his head is slightly raised,
or not much lowered; the tail is held erect, and quite rigid; the
hairs bristle, especially along the neck and back; the pricked ears are
directed forwards, and the eyes have a fixed stare: (see figs. 5 and
7). These actions, as will hereafter be explained, follow from the
dog's intention to attack his enemy, and are thus to a large extent
intelligible. As he prepares to spring with a savage growl on his enemy,
the canine teeth are uncovered, and the ears are pressed close backwards
on the head; but with these latter actions, we are not here concerned.
Let us now suppose that the dog suddenly discovers that the man he is
approaching, is not a stranger, but his master; and let it be observed
how completely and instantaneously his whole bearing is reversed.
Instead of walking upright, the body sinks downwards or even crouches,
and is thrown into flexuous movements; his tail, instead of being held
stiff and upright, is lowered and wagged from side to side; his hair
instantly becomes smooth; his ears are depressed and drawn backwards,
but not closely to the head; and his lips hang loosely. From the drawing
back of the ears, the eyelids become elongated, and the eyes no longer
appear round and staring. It should be added that the animal is at
such times in an excited condition from joy; and nerve-force will be
generated in excess, which naturally leads to action of some kind. Not
one of the above movements, so clearly expressive of affection, are of
the least direct service to the animal. They are explicable, as far as
I can see, solely from being in complete opposition or antithesis to the
attitude and movements which, from intelligible causes, are assumed when
a dog intends to fight, and which consequently are expressive of anger.
I request the reader to look at the four accompanying sketches, which
have been given in order to recall vividly the appearance of a dog under
these two states of mind. It is, however, not a little difficult to
represent affection in a dog, whilst caressing his master and wagging
his tail, as the essence of the expression lies in the continuous
flexuous movements.

[Illustration: Dog Carressing his master.  Fig. 8]

We will now turn to the cat. When this animal is threatened by a dog, it
arches its back in a surprising manner, erects its hair, opens its mouth
and spits. But we are not here concerned with this well-known attitude,
expressive of terror combined with anger; we are concerned only with
that of rage or anger. This is not often seen, but may be observed when
two cats are fighting together; and I have seen it well exhibited by a
savage cat whilst plagued by a boy. The attitude is almost exactly the
same as that of a tiger disturbed and growling over its food, which
every one must have beheld in menageries. The animal assumes a crouching
position, with the body extended; and the whole tail, or the tip alone,
is lashed or curled from side to side. The hair is not in the least
erect. Thus far, the attitude and movements are nearly the same as when
the animal is prepared to spring on its prey, and when, no doubt, it
feels savage. But when preparing to fight, there is this difference,
that the ears are closely pressed backwards; the mouth is partially
opened, showing the teeth; the fore feet are occasionally struck out
with protruded claws; and the animal occasionally utters a fierce growl.
(See figs. 9 and 10.) All, or almost all these actions naturally follow
(as hereafter to be explained), from the cat's manner and intention of
attacking its enemy.

[Illustration: Cat, savage, and prepared to fight. Fig. 9]

[Illustration: Cat in an affectionate frame of mind. Fig. 10]

Let us now look at a cat in a directly opposite frame of mind, whilst
feeling affectionate and caressing her master; and mark how opposite
is her attitude in every respect. She now stands upright with her back
slightly arched, which makes the hair appear rather rough, but it does
not bristle; her tail, instead of being extended and lashed from side
to side, is held quite still and perpendicularly upwards; her ears are
erect and pointed; her mouth is closed; and she rubs against her master
with a purr instead of a growl. Let it further be observed how widely
different is the whole bearing of an affectionate cat from that of a
dog, when with his body crouching and flexuous, his tail lowered and
wagging, and ears depressed, he caresses his master. This contrast in
the attitudes and movements of these two carnivorous animals, under the
same pleased and affectionate frame of mind, can be explained, as it
appears to me, solely by their movements standing in complete antithesis
to those which are naturally assumed, when these animals feel savage and
are prepared either to fight or to seize their prey.

In these cases of the dog and cat, there is every reason to believe that
the gestures both of hostility and affection are innate or inherited;
for they are almost identically the same in the different races of the
species, and in all the individuals of the same race, both young and
old.

I will here give one other instance of antithesis in expression. I
formerly possessed a large dog, who, like every other dog, was much
pleased to go out walking. He showed his pleasure by trotting gravely
before me with high steps, head much raised, moderately erected ears,
and tail carried aloft but not stiffly. Not far from my house a path
branches off to the right, leading to the hot-house, which I used often
to visit for a few moments, to look at my experimental plants. This was
always a great disappointment to the dog, as he did not know whether I
should continue my walk; and the instantaneous and complete change of
expression which came over him as soon as my body swerved in the least
towards the path (and I sometimes tried this as an experiment) was
laughable. His look of dejection was known to every member of the
family, and was called his _hot-house face_. This consisted in the head
drooping much, the whole body sinking a little and remaining motionless;
the ears and tail falling suddenly down, but the tail was by no means
wagged. With the falling of the ears and of his great chaps, the eyes
became much changed in appearance, and I fancied that they looked less
bright. His aspect was that of piteous, hopeless dejection; and it was,
as I have said, laughable, as the cause was so slight. Every detail
in his attitude was in complete opposition to his former joyful yet
dignified bearing; and can be explained, as it appears to me, in no
other way, except through the principle of antithesis. Had not the
change been so instantaneous, I should have attributed it to his
lowered spirits affecting, as in the case of man, the nervous system and
circulation, and consequently the tone of his whole muscular frame; and
this may have been in part the cause.

We will now consider how the principle of antithesis in expression has
arisen. With social animals, the power of intercommunication between
the members of the same community,--and with other species, between the
opposite sexes, as well as between the young and the old,--is of the
highest importance to them. This is generally effected by means of the
voice, but it is certain that gestures and expressions are to a certain
extent mutually intelligible. Man not only uses inarticulate cries,
gestures, and expressions, but has invented articulate language; if,
indeed, the word INVENTED can be applied to a process, completed by
innumerable steps, half-consciously made. Any one who has watched
monkeys will not doubt that they perfectly understand each other's
gestures and expression, and to a large extent, as Rengger asserts,[201]
those of man. An animal when going to attack another, or when afraid of
another, often makes itself appear terrible, by erecting its hair,
thus increasing the apparent bulk of its body, by showing its teeth, or
brandishing its horns, or by uttering fierce sounds.

As the power of intercommunication is certainly of high service to many
animals, there is no _a priori_ improbability in the supposition, that
gestures manifestly of an opposite nature to those by which certain
feelings are already expressed, should at first have been voluntarily
employed under the influence of an opposite state of feeling. The fact
of the gestures being now innate, would be no valid objection to the
belief that they were at first intentional; for if practised during many
generations, they would probably at last be inherited. Nevertheless it
is more than doubtful, as we shall immediately see, whether any of
the cases which come under our present head of antithesis, have thus
originated.

With conventional signs which are not innate, such as those used by the
deaf and dumb and by savages, the principle of opposition or antithesis
has been partially brought into play. The Cistercian monks thought it
sinful to speak, and as they could not avoid holding some communication,
they invented a gesture language, in which the principle of opposition
seems to have been employed.[202] Dr. Scott, of the Exeter Deaf and Dumb
Institution, writes to me that "opposites are greatly used in teaching
the deaf and dumb, who have a lively sense of them." Nevertheless I
have been surprised how few unequivocal instances can be adduced. This
depends partly on all the signs having commonly had some natural origin;
and partly on the practice of the deaf and dumb and of savages to
contract their signs as much as possible for the sake of rapidity?[203]
Hence their natural source or origin often becomes doubtful or is
completely lost; as is likewise the case with articulate language.

Many signs, moreover, which plainly stand in opposition to each other,
appear to have had on both sides a significant origin. This seems
to hold good with the signs used by the deal and dumb for light and
darkness, for strength and weakness, &c. In a future chapter I shall
endeavour to show that the opposite gestures of affirmation and
negation, namely, vertically nodding and laterally shaking the head,
have both probably had a natural beginning. The waving of the hand from
right to left, which is used as a negative by some savages, may have
been invented in imitation of shaking the head; but whether the opposite
movement of waving the hand in a straight line from the face, which
is used in affirmation, has arisen through antithesis or in some quite
distinct manner, is doubtful.

If we now turn to the gestures which are innate or common to all the
individuals of the same species, and which come under the present head
of antithesis, it is extremely doubtful, whether any of them were at
first deliberately invented and consciously performed. With mankind
the best instance of a gesture standing in direct opposition to other
movements, naturally assumed under an opposite frame of mind, is that
of shrugging the shoulders. This expresses impotence or an
apology,--something which cannot be done, or cannot be avoided. The
gesture is sometimes used consciously and voluntarily, but it is
extremely improbable that it was at first deliberately invented, and
afterwards fixed by habit; for not only do young children sometimes
shrug their shoulders under the above states of mind, but the movement
is accompanied, as will be shown in a future chapter, by various
subordinate movements, which not one man in a thousand is aware of,
unless he has specially attended to the subject.

Dogs when approaching a strange dog, may find it useful to show by their
movements that they are friendly, and do not wish to fight. When two
young dogs in play are growling and biting each other's faces and legs,
it is obvious that they mutually understand each other's gestures and
manners. There seems, indeed, some degree of instinctive knowledge in
puppies and kittens, that they must not use their sharp little teeth
or claws too freely in their play, though this sometimes happens and
a squeal is the result; otherwise they would often injure each other's
eyes. When my terrier bites my hand in play, often snarling at the same
time, if he bites too hard and I say GENTLY, GENTLY, he goes on biting,
but answers me by a few wags of the tail, which seems to say "Never
mind, it is all fun." Although dogs do thus express, and may wish to
express, to other dogs and to man, that they are in a friendly state of
mind, it is incredible that they could ever have deliberately thought
of drawing back and depressing their ears, instead of holding them
erect,--of lowering and wagging their tails, instead of keeping them
stiff and upright, &c., because they knew that these movements stood in
direct opposition to those assumed under an opposite and savage frame of
mind.

Again, when a cat, or rather when some early progenitor of the species,
from feeling affectionate first slightly arched its back, held its tail
perpendicularly upwards and pricked its ears, can it be believed that
the animal consciously wished thus to show that its frame of mind was
directly the reverse of that, when from being ready to fight or to
spring on its prey, it assumed a crouching attitude, curled its tail
from side to side and depressed its ears? Even still less can I believe
that my dog voluntarily put on his dejected attitude and "_hot-house
face_," which formed so complete a contrast to his previous cheerful
attitude and whole bearing. It cannot be supposed that he knew that I
should understand his expression, and that he could thus soften my heart
and make me give up visiting the hot-house.

Hence for the development of the movements which come under the present
head, some other principle, distinct from the will and consciousness,
must have intervened. This principle appears to be that every movement
which we have voluntarily performed throughout our lives has required
the action of certain muscles; and when we have performed a directly
opposite movement, an opposite set of muscles has been habitually
brought into play,--as in turning to the right or to the left, in
pushing away or pulling an object towards us, and in lifting or lowering
a weight. So strongly are our intentions and movements associated
together, that if we eagerly wish an object to move in any direction,
we can hardly avoid moving our bodies in the same direction, although
we may be perfectly aware that this can have no influence. A good
illustration of this fact has already been given in the Introduction,
namely, in the grotesque movements of a young and eager billiard-player,
whilst watching the course of his ball. A man or child in a passion, if
he tells any one in a loud voice to begone, generally moves his arm as
if to push him away, although the offender may not be standing near, and
although there may be not the least need to explain by a gesture what is
meant. On the other hand, if we eagerly desire some one to approach
us closely, we act as if pulling him towards us; and so in innumerable
other instances.

As the performance of ordinary movements of an opposite kind, under
opposite impulses of the will, has become habitual in us and in the
lower animals, so when actions of one kind have become firmly associated
with any sensation or emotion, it appears natural that actions of
a directly opposite kind, though of no use, should be unconsciously
performed through habit and association, under the influence of a
directly opposite sensation or emotion. On this principle alone can I
understand how the gestures and expressions which come under the present
head of antithesis have originated. If indeed they are serviceable to
man or to any other animal, in aid of inarticulate cries or language,
they will likewise be voluntarily employed, and the habit will thus be
strengthened. But whether or not of service as a means of communication,
the tendency to perform opposite movements under opposite sensations or
emotions would, if we may judge by analogy, become hereditary through
long practice; and there cannot be a doubt that several expressive
movements due to the principle of antithesis are inherited.



CHAPTER III. -- GENERAL PRINCIPLES OF EXPRESSION--_concluded_.

The principle of direct action of the excited nervous system on the
body, independently of the will and in part of habit--Change of
colour in the hair--Trembling of the muscles--Modified
secretions--Perspiration--Expression of extreme pain--Of rage, great
joy, and terror--Contrast between the emotions which cause and do
not cause expressive movements--Exciting and depressing states of the
mind--Summary.


WE now come to our third Principle, namely, that certain actions which
we recognize as expressive of certain states of the mind, are the direct
result of the constitution of the nervous system, and have been from the
first independent of the will, and, to a large extent, of habit. When
the sensorium is strongly excited nerve-force is generated in excess,
and is transmitted in certain directions, dependent on the connection of
the nerve-cells, and, as far as the muscular system is concerned, on
the nature of the movements which have been habitually practised. Or
the supply of nerve-force may, as it appears, be interrupted. Of course
every movement which we make is determined by the constitution of the
nervous system; but actions performed in obedience to the will, or
through habit, or through the principle of antithesis, are here as far
as possible excluded. Our present subject is very obscure, but, from its
importance, must be discussed at some little length; and it is always
advisable to perceive clearly our ignorance.

The most striking case, though a rare and abnormal one, which can be
adduced of the direct influence of the nervous system, when strongly
affected, on the body, is the loss of colour in the hair, which has
occasionally been observed after extreme terror or grief. One authentic
instance has been recorded, in the case of a man brought out for
execution in India, in which the change of colour was so rapid that it
was perceptible to the eye.[301]

Another good case is that of the trembling of the muscles, which is
common to man and to many, or most, of the lower animals. Trembling is
of no service, often of much disservice, and cannot have been at first
acquired through the will, and then rendered habitual in association
with any emotion. I am assured by an eminent authority that young
children do not tremble, but go into convulsions under the circumstances
which would induce excessive trembling in adults. Trembling is excited
in different individuals in very different degrees and by the most
diversified causes,--by cold to the surface, before fever-fits, although
the temperature of the body is then above the normal standard; in
blood-poisoning, delirium tremens, and other diseases; by general
failure of power in old age; by exhaustion after excessive fatigue;
locally from severe injuries, such as burns; and, in an especial manner,
by the passage of a catheter. Of all emotions, fear notoriously is the
most apt to induce trembling; but so do occasionally great anger and
joy. I remember once seeing a boy who had just shot his first snipe on
the wing, and his hands trembled to such a degree from delight, that he
could not for some time reload his gun; and I have heard of an exactly
similar case with an Australian savage, to whom a gun had been lent.
Fine music, from the vague emotions thus excited, causes a shiver to run
down the backs of some persons. There seems to be very little in
common in the above several physical causes and emotions to account for
trembling; and Sir J. Paget, to whom I am indebted for several of the
above statements, informs me that the subject is a very obscure one. As
trembling is sometimes caused by rage, long before exhaustion can have
set in, and as it sometimes accompanies great joy, it would appear that
any strong excitement of the nervous system interrupts the steady flow
of nerve-force to the muscles.[302]

The manner in which the secretions of the alimentary canal and of
certain glands--as the liver, kidneys, or mammae are affected by strong
emotions, is another excellent instance of the direct action of
the sensorium on these organs, independently of the will or of any
serviceable associated habit. There is the greatest difference in
different persons in the parts which are thus affected, and in the
degree of their affection.

The heart, which goes on uninterruptedly beating night and day in so
wonderful a manner, is extremely sensitive to external stimulants.
The great physiologist, Claude Bernard,[303] has shown bow the least
excitement of a sensitive nerve reacts on the heart; even when a nerve
is touched so slightly that no pain can possibly be felt by the animal
under experiment. Hence when the mind is strongly excited, we might
expect that it would instantly affect in a direct manner the heart; and
this is universally acknowledged and felt to be the case. Claude Bernard
also repeatedly insists, and this deserves especial notice, that when
the heart is affected it reacts on the brain; and the state of the brain
again reacts through the pneumo-gastric nerve on the heart; so that
under any excitement there will be much mutual action and reaction
between these, the two most important organs of the body.

The vaso-motor system, which regulates the diameter of the small
arteries, is directly acted on by the sensorium, as we see when a man
blushes from shame; but in this latter case the checked transmission of
nerve-force to the vessels of the face can, I think, be partly explained
in a curious manner through habit. We shall also be able to throw some
light, though very little, on the involuntary erection of the hair under
the emotions of terror and rage. The secretion of tears depends, no
doubt, on the connection of certain nerve-cells; but here again we can
trace some few of the steps by which the flow of nerve-force through the
requisite channels has become habitual under certain emotions.

A brief consideration of the outward signs of some of the stronger
sensations and emotions will best serve to show us, although vaguely,
in how complex a manner the principle under consideration of the direct
action of the excited nervous system of the body, is combined with the
principle of habitually associated, serviceable movements.

When animals suffer from an agony of pain, they generally writhe about
with frightful contortions; and those which habitually use their voices
utter piercing cries or groans. Almost every muscle of the body
is brought into strong action. With man the mouth may be closely
compressed, or more commonly the lips are retracted, with the teeth
clenched or ground together. There is said to be "gnashing of teeth" in
hell; and I have plainly heard the grinding of the molar teeth of a cow
which was suffering acutely from inflammation of the bowels. The female
hippopotamus in the Zoological Gardens, when she produced her young,
suffered greatly; she incessantly walked about, or rolled on her sides,
opening and closing her jaws, and clattering her teeth together.[304]
With man the eyes stare wildly as in horrified astonishment, or the
brows are heavily contracted. Perspiration bathes the body, and
drops trickle down the face. The circulation and respiration are much
affected. Hence the nostrils are generally dilated and often quiver; or
the breath may be held until the blood stagnates in the purple face.
If the agony be severe and prolonged, these signs all change; utter
prostration follows, with fainting or convulsions.

A sensitive nerve when irritated transmits some influence to the
nerve-cell, whence it proceeds; and this transmits its influence, first
to the corresponding nerve-cell on the opposite side of the body, and
then upwards and downwards along the cerebro-spinal column to other
nerve-cells, to a greater or less extent, according to the strength
of the excitement; so that, ultimately, the whole nervous system maybe
affected.[305] This involuntary transmission of nerve-force may or may
not be accompanied by consciousness. Why the irritation of a nerve-cell
should generate or liberate nerve-force is not known; but that this
is the case seems to be the conclusion arrived at by all the greatest
physiologists, such as Muller, Virchow, Bernard, &c.[306] As Mr. Herbert
Spencer remarks, it may be received as an "unquestionable truth that, at
any moment, the existing quantity of liberated nerve-force, which in an
inscrutable way produces in us the state we call feeling, MUST expend
itself in some direction--MUST generate an equivalent manifestation
of force somewhere;" so that, when the cerebro-spinal system is highly
excited and nerve-force is liberated in excess, it may be expended in
intense sensations, active thought, violent movements, or increased
activity of the glands.[307] Mr. Spencer further maintains that an
"overflow of nerve-force, undirected by any motive, will manifestly
take the most habitual routes; and, if these do not suffice, will next
overflow into the less habitual ones." Consequently the facial and
respiratory muscles, which are the most used, will be apt to be first
brought into action; then those of the upper extremities, next those of
the lower, and finally those of the whole body.[308]

An emotion may be very strong, but it will have little tendency to
induce movements of any kind, if it has not commonly led to voluntary
action for its relief or gratification; and when movements are excited,
their nature is, to a large extent, determined by those which have often
and voluntarily been performed for some definite end under the same
emotion. Great pain urges all animals, and has urged them during endless
generations, to make the most violent and diversified efforts to escape
from the cause of suffering. Even when a limb or other separate part of
the body is hurt, we often see a tendency to shake it, as if to shake
off the cause, though this may obviously be impossible. Thus a habit
of exerting with the utmost force all the muscles will have been
established, whenever great suffering is experienced. As the muscles
of the chest and vocal organs are habitually used, these will be
particularly liable to be acted on, and loud, harsh screams or cries
will be uttered. But the advantage derived from outcries has here
probably come into play in an important manner; for the young of most
animals, when in distress or danger, call loudly to their parents for
aid, as do the members of the same community for mutual aid.

Another principle, namely, the internal consciousness that the power
or capacity of the nervous system is limited, will have strengthened,
though in a subordinate degree, the tendency to violent action under
extreme suffering. A man cannot think deeply and exert his utmost
muscular force. As Hippocrates long ago observed, if two pains are
felt at the same time, the severer one dulls the other. Martyrs, in the
ecstasy of their religious fervour have often, as it would appear, been
insensible to the most horrid tortures. Sailors who are going to be
flogged sometimes take a piece of lead into their mouths, in order to
bite it with their utmost force, and thus to bear the pain. Parturient
women prepare to exert their muscles to the utmost in order to relieve
their sufferings.

We thus see that the undirected radiation of nerve-force from the
nerve-cells which are first affected--the long-continued habit of
attempting by struggling to escape from the cause of suffering--and the
consciousness that voluntary muscular exertion relieves pain, have all
probably concurred in giving a tendency to the most violent, almost
convulsive, movements under extreme suffering; and such movements,
including those of the vocal organs, are universally recognized as
highly expressive of this condition.

As the mere touching of a sensitive nerve reacts in a direct manner on
the heart, severe pain will obviously react on it in like manner, but
far more energetically. Nevertheless, even in this case, we must not
overlook the indirect effects of habit on the heart, as we shall see
when we consider the signs of rage.

When a man suffers from an agony of pain, the perspiration often
trickles down his face; and I have been assured by a veterinary surgeon
that he has frequently seen drops falling from the belly and running
down the inside of the thighs of horses, and from the bodies of cattle,
when thus suffering. He has observed this, when there has been no
struggling which would account for the perspiration. The whole body
of the female hippopotamus, before alluded to, was covered with
red-coloured perspiration whilst giving birth to her young. So it is
with extreme fear; the same veterinary has often seen horses sweating
from this cause; as has Mr. Bartlett with the rhinoceros; and with man
it is a well-known symptom. The cause of perspiration bursting forth in
these cases is quite obscure; but it is thought by some physiologists to
be connected with the failing power of the capillary circulation; and
we know that the vasomotor system, which regulates the capillary
circulation, is much influenced by the mind. With respect to the
movements of certain muscles of the face under great suffering, as well
as from other emotions, these will be best considered when we treat of
the special expressions of man and of the lower animals.

We will now turn to the characteristic symptoms of Rage. Under this
powerful emotion the action of the heart is much accelerated,[309] or it
may be much disturbed. The face reddens, or it becomes purple from the
impeded return of the blood, or may turn deadly pale. The respiration is
laboured, the chest heaves, and the dilated nostrils quiver. The whole
body often trembles. The voice is affected. The teeth are clenched
or ground together, and the muscular system is commonly stimulated to
violent, almost frantic action. But the gestures of a man in this state
usually differ from the purposeless writhings and struggles of one
suffering from an agony of pain; for they represent more or less plainly
the act of striking or fighting with an enemy.

All these signs of rage are probably in large part, and some of them
appear to be wholly, due to the direct action of the excited sensorium.
But animals of all kinds, and their progenitors before them, when
attacked or threatened by an enemy, have exerted their utmost powers in
fighting and in defending themselves. Unless an animal does thus act,
or has the intention, or at least the desire, to attack its enemy, it
cannot properly be said to be enraged. An inherited habit of muscular
exertion will thus have been gained in association with rage; and this
will directly or indirectly affect various organs, in nearly the same
manner as does great bodily suffering.

The heart no doubt will likewise be affected in a direct manner; but it
will also in all probability be affected through habit; and all the more
so from not being under the control of the will. We know that any
great exertion which we voluntarily make, affects the heart, through
mechanical and other principles which need not here be considered; and
it was shown in the first chapter that nerve-force flows readily
through habitually used channels,--through the nerves of voluntary
or involuntary movement, and through those of sensation. Thus even a
moderate amount of exertion will tend to act on the heart; and on the
principle of association, of which so many instances have been given,
we may feel nearly sure that any sensation or emotion, as great pain or
rage, which has habitually led to much muscular action, will immediately
influence the flow of nerve-force to the heart, although there may not
be at the time any muscular exertion.

The heart, as I have said, will be all the more readily affected through
habitual associations, as it is not under the control of the will. A man
when moderately angry, or even when enraged, may command the movements
of his body, but he cannot prevent his heart from beating rapidly. His
chest will perhaps give a few heaves, and his nostrils just quiver, for
the movements of respiration are only in part voluntary. In like manner
those muscles of the face which are least obedient to the will, will
sometimes alone betray a slight and passing emotion. The glands again
are wholly independent of the will, and a man suffering from grief may
command his features, but cannot always prevent the tears from coming
into his eyes. A hungry man, if tempting food is placed before him,
may not show his hunger by any outward gesture, but he cannot check the
secretion of saliva.

Under a transport of Joy or of vivid Pleasure, there is a strong
tendency to various purposeless movements, and to the utterance of
various sounds. We see this in our young children, in their loud
laughter, clapping of hands, and jumping for joy; in the bounding and
barking of a dog when going out to walk with his master; and in the
frisking of a horse when turned out into an open field. Joy quickens the
circulation, and this stimulates the brain, which again reacts on the
whole body. The above purposeless movements and increased heart-action
may be attributed in chief part to the excited state of the
sensorium,[310] and to the consequent undirected overflow, as Mr.
Herbert Spencer insists, of nerve-force. It deserves notice, that it is
chiefly the anticipation of a pleasure, and not its actual enjoyment,
which leads to purposeless and extravagant movements of the body, and to
the utterance of various sounds. We see this in our children when they
expect any great pleasure or treat; and dogs, which have been bounding
about at the sight of a plate of food, when they get it do not show
their delight by any outward sign, not even by wagging their tails.
Now with animals of all kinds, the acquirement of almost all their
pleasures, with the exception of those of warmth and rest, are
associated, and have long been associated with active movements, as in
the hunting or search for food, and in their courtship. Moreover, the
mere exertion of the muscles after long rest or confinement is in itself
a pleasure, as we ourselves feel, and as we see in the play of young
animals. Therefore on this latter principle alone we might perhaps
expect, that vivid pleasure would be apt to show itself conversely in
muscular movements.

With all or almost all animals, even with birds, Terror causes the
body to tremble. The skin becomes pale, sweat breaks out, and the hair
bristles. The secretions of the alimentary canal and of the kidneys are
increased, and they are involuntarily voided, owing to the relaxation
of the sphincter muscles, as is known to be the case with man, and as
I have seen with cattle, dogs, cats, and monkeys. The breathing is
hurried. The heart beats quickly, wildly, and violently; but whether it
pumps the blood more efficiently through the body may be doubted, for
the surface seems bloodless and the strength of the muscles soon fails.
In a frightened horse I have felt through the saddle the beating of
the heart so plainly that I could have counted the beats. The mental
faculties are much disturbed. Utter prostration soon follows, and even
fainting. A terrified canary-bird has been seen not only to tremble and
to turn white about the base of the bill, but to faint;[311] and I once
caught a robin in a room, which fainted so completely, that for a time I
thought it dead.

Most of these symptoms are probably the direct result, independently
of habit, of the disturbed state of the sensorium; but it is doubtful
whether they ought to be wholly thus accounted for. When an animal is
alarmed it almost always stands motionless for a moment, in order to
collect its senses and to ascertain the source of danger, and sometimes
for the sake of escaping detection. But headlong flight soon follows,
with no husbanding of the strength as in fighting, and the animal
continues to fly as long as the danger lasts, until utter prostration,
with failing respiration and circulation, with all the muscles quivering
and profuse sweating, renders further flight impossible. Hence it does
not seem improbable that the principle of associated habit may in part
account for, or at least augment, some of the above-named characteristic
symptoms of extreme terror.


That the principle of associated habit has played an important part
in causing the movements expressive of the foregoing several strong
emotions and sensations, we may, I think, conclude from considering
firstly, some other strong emotions which do not ordinarily require for
their relief or gratification any voluntary movement; and secondly the
contrast in nature between the so-called exciting and depressing states
of the mind. No emotion is stronger than maternal love; but a mother may
feel the deepest love for her helpless infant, and yet not show it by
any outward sign; or only by slight caressing movements, with a gentle
smile and tender eyes. But let any one intentionally injure her infant,
and see what a change! how she starts up with threatening aspect, how
her eyes sparkle and her face reddens, how her bosom heaves, nostrils
dilate, and heart beats; for anger, and not maternal love, has
habitually led to action. The love between the opposite sexes is widely
different from maternal love; and when lovers meet, we know that their
hearts beat quickly, their breathing is hurried, and their faces flush;
for this love is not inactive like that of a mother for her infant.

A man may have his mind filled with the blackest hatred or suspicion, or
be corroded with envy or jealousy, but as these feelings do not at once
lead to action, and as they commonly last for some time, they are not
shown by any outward sign, excepting that a man in this state assuredly
does not appear cheerful or good-tempered. If indeed these feelings
break out into overt acts, rage takes their place, and will be plainly
exhibited. Painters can hardly portray suspicion, jealousy, envy, &c.,
except by the aid of accessories which tell the tale; and poets use
such vague and fanciful expressions as "green-eyed jealousy." Spenser
describes suspicion as "Foul, ill-favoured, and grim, under his eyebrows
looking still askance," &c.; Shakespeare speaks of envy "as lean-faced
in her loathsome case;" and in another place he says, "no black envy
shall make my grave;" and again as "above pale envy's threatening
reach."

Emotions and sensations have often been classed as exciting or
depressing. When all the organs of the body and mind,--those of
voluntary and involuntary movement, of perception, sensation, thought,
&c.,--perform their functions more energetically and rapidly than usual,
a man or animal may be said to be excited, and, under an opposite state,
to be depressed. Anger and joy are from the first exciting emotions, and
they naturally lead, more especially the former, to energetic movements,
which react on the heart and this again on the brain. A physician once
remarked to me as a proof of the exciting nature of anger, that a man
when excessively jaded will sometimes invent imaginary offences and put
himself into a passion, unconsciously for the sake of reinvigorating
himself; and since hearing this remark, I have occasionally recognized
its full truth.

Several other states of mind appear to be at first exciting, but soon
become depressing to an extreme degree. When a mother suddenly loses her
child, sometimes she is frantic with grief, and must be considered to be
in an excited state; she walks wildly about, tears her hair or clothes,
and wrings her hands. This latter action is perhaps due to the principle
of antithesis, betraying an inward sense of helplessness and that
nothing can be done. The other wild and violent movements may be in part
explained by the relief experienced through muscular exertion, and
in part by the undirected overflow of nerve-force from the excited
sensorium. But under the sudden loss of a beloved person, one of the
first and commonest thoughts which occurs, is that something more might
have been done to save the lost one. An excellent observer,[312] in
describing the behaviour of a girl at the sudden death of her father,
says she "went about the house wringing her hands like a creature
demented, saying 'It was her fault;' 'I should never have left him;'
'If I had only sat up with him,'" &c. With such ideas vividly present
before the mind, there would arise, through the principle of associated
habit, the strongest tendency to energetic action of some kind.

As soon as the sufferer is fully conscious that nothing can be done,
despair or deep sorrow takes the place of frantic grief. The sufferer
sits motionless, or gently rocks to and fro; the circulation becomes
languid; respiration is almost forgotten, and deep sighs are drawn.

Pain, if severe, soon induces extreme depression or prostration; but it
is at first a stimulant and excites to action, as we see when we whip a
horse, and as is shown by the horrid tortures inflicted in foreign lands
on exhausted dray-bullocks, to rouse them to renewed exertion. Fear
again is the most depressing of all the emotions; and it soon induces
utter, helpless prostration, as if in consequence of, or in association
with, the most violent and prolonged attempts to escape from the danger,
though no such attempts have actually been made. Nevertheless, even
extreme fear often acts at first as a powerful stimulant. A man or
animal driven through terror to desperation, is endowed with wonderful
strength, and is notoriously dangerous in the highest degree.

On the whole we may conclude that the principle of the direct action
of the sensorium on the body, due to the constitution of the nervous
system, and from the first independent of the will, has been highly
influential in determining many expressions. Good instances are afforded
by the trembling of the muscles, the sweating of the skin, the modified
secretions of the alimentary canal and glands, under various emotions
and sensations. But actions of this kind are often combined with others,
which follow from our first principle, namely, that actions which have
often been of direct or indirect service, under certain states of the
mind, in order to gratify or relieve certain sensations, desires, &c.,
are still performed under analogous circumstances through mere habit
although of no service. We have combinations of this kind, at least in
part, in the frantic gestures of rage and in the writhings of extreme
pain; and, perhaps, in the increased action of the heart and of the
respiratory organs. Even when these and other emotions or sensations
are aroused in a very feeble manner, there will still be a tendency to
similar actions, owing to the force of long-associated habit; and
those actions which are least under voluntary control will generally
be longest retained. Our second principle of antithesis has likewise
occasionally come into play.

Finally, so many expressive movements can be explained, as I trust will
be seen in the course of this volume, through the three principles which
have now been discussed, that we may hope hereafter to see all thus
explained, or by closely analogous principles. It is, however, often
impossible to decide how much weight ought to be attributed, in each
particular case, to one of our principles, and how much to another; and
very many points in the theory of Expression remain inexplicable.



CHAPTER IV. -- MEANS OF EXPRESSION IN ANIMALS.

The emission of Sounds--Vocal sounds--Sounds otherwise
produced--Erection of the dermal appendages, hairs, feathers, &c., under
the emotions of anger and terror--The drawing back of the ears as a
preparation for fighting, and as an expression of anger--Erection of the
ears and raising the head, a sign of attention.


IN this and the following chapter I will describe, but only in
sufficient detail to illustrate my subject, the expressive movements,
under different states of the mind, of some few well-known animals. But
before considering them in due succession, it will save much useless
repetition to discuss certain means of expression common to most of
them.

_The emission of Sounds_.--With many kinds of animals, man included,
the vocal organs are efficient in the highest degree as a means of
expression. We have seen, in the last chapter, that when the sensorium
is strongly excited, the muscles of the body are generally thrown into
violent action; and as a consequence, loud sounds are uttered, however
silent the animal may generally be, and although the sounds may be of no
use. Hares and rabbits for instance, never, I believe, use their vocal
organs except in the extremity of suffering; as, when a wounded hare is
killed by the sportsman, or when a young rabbit is caught by a stoat.
Cattle and horses suffer great pain in silence; but when this is
excessive, and especially when associated with terror, they utter
fearful sounds. I have often recognized, from a distance on the Pampas,
the agonized death-bellow of the cattle, when caught by the lasso and
hamstrung. It is said that horses, when attacked by wolves, utter loud
and peculiar screams of distress.

Involuntary and purposeless contractions of the muscles of the chest and
glottis, excited in the above manner, may have first given rise to the
emission of vocal sounds. But the voice is now largely used by many
animals for various purposes; and habit seems to have played an
important part in its employment under other circumstances. Naturalists
have remarked, I believe with truth, that social animals, from
habitually using their vocal organs as a means of intercommunication,
use them on other occasions much more freely than other animals. But
there are marked exceptions to this rule, for instance, with the rabbit.
The principle, also, of association, which is so widely extended in its
power, has likewise played its part. Hence it follows that the voice,
from having been habitually employed as a serviceable aid under certain
conditions, inducing pleasure, pain, rage, &c., is commonly used
whenever the same sensations or emotions are excited, under quite
different conditions, or in a lesser degree.

The sexes of many animals incessantly call for each other during the
breeding-season; and in not a few cases, the male endeavours thus
to charm or excite the female. This, indeed, seems to have been the
primeval use and means of development of the voice, as I have attempted
to show in my 'Descent of Man.' Thus the use of the vocal organs will
have become associated with the anticipation of the strongest pleasure
which animals are capable of feeling. Animals which live in society
often call to each other when separated, and evidently feel much joy
at meeting; as we see with a horse, on the return of his companion, for
whom he has been neighing. The mother calls incessantly for her lost
young ones; for instance, a cow for her calf; and the young of many
animals call for their mothers. When a flock of sheep is scattered, the
ewes bleat incessantly for their lambs, and their mutual pleasure at
coming together is manifest. Woe betide the man who meddles with the
young of the larger and fiercer quadrupeds, if they hear the cry of
distress from their young. Rage leads to the violent exertion of all the
muscles, including those of the voice; and some animals, when enraged,
endeavour to strike terror into their enemies by its power and
harshness, as the lion does by roaring, and the dog by growling. I infer
that their object is to strike terror, because the lion at the same time
erects the hair of its mane, and the dog the hair along its back, and
thus they make themselves appear as large and terrible as possible.
Rival males try to excel and challenge each other by their voices,
and this leads to deadly contests. Thus the use of the voice will have
become associated with the emotion of anger, however it may be aroused.
We have also seen that intense pain, like rage, leads to violent
outcries, and the exertion of screaming by itself gives some relief; and
thus the use of the voice will have become associated with suffering of
any kind.

The cause of widely different sounds being uttered under different
emotions and sensations is a very obscure subject. Nor does the rule
always hold good that there is any marked difference. For instance with
the dog, the bark of anger and that of joy do not differ much,
though they can be distinguished. It is not probable that any precise
explanation of the cause or source of each particular sound, under
different states of the mind, will ever be given. We now that some
animals, after being domesticated, have acquired the habit of uttering
sounds which were not natural to them.[401] Thus domestic dogs, and even
tamed jackals, have learnt to bark, which is a noise not proper to any
species of the genus, with the exception of the _Canis latrans_ of
North America, which is said to bark. Some breeds, also, of the domestic
pigeon have learnt to coo in a new and quite peculiar manner.

The character of the human voice, under the influence of various
emotions, has been discussed by Mr. Herbert Spencer[402] in his
interesting essay on Music. He clearly shows that the voice alters much
under different conditions, in loudness and in quality, that is, in
resonance and _timbre_, in pitch and intervals. No one can listen to an
eloquent orator or preacher, or to a man calling angrily to another, or
to one expressing astonishment, without being struck with the truth of
Mr. Spencer's remarks. It is curious how early in life the modulation of
the voice becomes expressive. With one of my children, under the age of
two years, I clearly perceived that his humph of assent was rendered by
a slight modulation strongly emphatic; and that by a peculiar whine his
negative expressed obstinate determination. Mr. Spencer further shows
that emotional speech, in all the above respects is intimately related
to vocal music, and consequently to instrumental music; and he attempts
to explain the characteristic qualities of both on physiological
grounds--namely, on "the general law that a feeling is a stimulus to
muscular action." It may be admitted that the voice is affected through
this law; but the explanation appears to me too general and vague to
throw much light on the various differences, with the exception of that
of loudness, between ordinary speech and emotional speech, or singing.

This remark holds good, whether we believe that the various qualities
of the voice originated in speaking under the excitement of strong
feelings, and that these qualities have subsequently been transferred
to vocal music; or whether we believe, as I maintain, that the habit of
uttering musical sounds was first developed, as a means of courtship,
in the early progenitors of man, and thus became associated with the
strongest emotions of which they were capable,--namely, ardent love,
rivalry and triumph. That animals utter musical notes is familiar to
every one, as we may daily hear in the singing of birds. It is a more
remarkable fact that an ape, one of the Gibbons, produces an exact
octave of musical sounds, ascending and descending the scale by
halftones; so that this monkey "alone of brute mammals may be said to
sing."[403] From this fact, and from the analogy of other animals, I
have been led to infer that the progenitors of man probably uttered
musical tones, before they had acquired the power of articulate speech;
and that consequently, when the voice is used under any strong emotion,
it tends to assume, through the principle of association, a musical
character. We can plainly perceive, with some of the lower animals,
that the males employ their voices to please the females, and that
they themselves take pleasure in their own vocal utterances; but why
particular sounds are uttered, and why these give pleasure cannot at
present be explained.

That the pitch of the voice bears some relation to certain states
of feeling is tolerably clear. A person gently complaining of
ill-treatment, or slightly suffering, almost always speaks in a
high-pitched voice. Dogs, when a little impatient, often make a
high piping note through their noses, which at once strikes us as
plaintive;[404] but how difficult it is to know whether the sound is
essentially plaintive, or only appears so in this particular case, from
our having learnt by experience what it means! Rengger, states[405]
that the monkeys (_Cebus azaroe_), which he kept in Paraguay, expressed
astonishment by a half-piping, half-snarling noise; anger or impatience,
by repeating the sound _hu hu_ in a deeper, grunting voice; and fright
or pain, by shrill screams. On the other hand, with mankind, deep groans
and high piercing screams equally express an agony of pain. Laughter
maybe either high or low; so that, with adult men, as Haller long ago
remarked,[406] the sound partakes of the character of the vowels (as
pronounced in German) _O_ and _A_; whilst with children and women, it
has more of the character of _E_ and _I_; and these latter vowel-sounds
naturally have, as Helmholtz has shown, a higher pitch than the former;
yet both tones of laughter equally express enjoyment or amusement.

In considering the mode in which vocal utterances express emotion,
we are naturally led to inquire into the cause of what is called
"expression" in music. Upon this point Mr. Litchfield, who has long
attended to the subject of music, has been so kind as to give me the
following remarks:--"The question, what is the essence of musical
'expression' involves a number of obscure points, which, so far as I am
aware, are as yet unsolved enigmas. Up to a certain point, however,
any law which is found to hold as to the expression of the emotions by
simple sounds must apply to the more developed mode of expression in
song, which may be taken as the primary type of all music. A great part
of the emotional effect of a song depends on the character of the action
by which the sounds are produced. In songs, for instance, which express
great vehemence of passion, the effect often chiefly depends on the
forcible utterance of some one or two characteristic passages which
demand great exertion of vocal force; and it will be frequently noticed
that a song of this character fails of its proper effect when sung by a
voice of sufficient power and range to give the characteristic passages
without much exertion. This is, no doubt, the secret of the loss of
effect so often produced by the transposition of a song from one key
to another. The effect is thus seen to depend not merely on the actual
sounds, but also in part on the nature of the action which produces the
sounds. Indeed it is obvious that whenever we feel the 'expression' of
a song to be due to its quickness or slowness of movement--to smoothness
of flow, loudness of utterance, and so on--we are, in fact, interpreting
the muscular actions which produce sound, in the same way in which we
interpret muscular action generally. But this leaves unexplained
the more subtle and more specific effect which we call the MUSICAL
expression of the song--the delight given by its melody, or even by the
separate sounds which make up the melody. This is an effect indefinable
in language--one which, so far as I am aware, no one has been able to
analyse, and which the ingenious speculation of Mr. Herbert Spencer as
to the origin of music leaves quite unexplained. For it is certain that
the MELODIC effect of a series of sounds does not depend in the least on
their loudness or softness, or on their ABSOLUTE pitch. A tune is always
the same tune, whether it is sung loudly or softly, by a child or a man;
whether it is played on a flute or on a trombone. The purely musical
effect of any sound depends on its place in what is technically called
a 'scale;' the same sound producing absolutely different effects on the
ear, according as it is heard in connection with one or another series
of sounds.

"It is on this RELATIVE association of the sounds that all the
essentially characteristic effects which are summed up in the phrase
'musical expression,' depend. But why certain associations of sounds
have such-and-such effects, is a problem which yet remains to be solved.
These effects must indeed, in some way or other, be connected with the
well-known arithmetical relations between the rates of vibration of
the sounds which form a musical scale. And it is possible--but this is
merely a suggestion--that the greater or less mechanical facility with
which the vibrating apparatus of the human larynx passes from one state
of vibration to another, may have been a primary cause of the greater or
less pleasure produced by various sequences of sounds."

But leaving aside these complex questions and confining ourselves to the
simpler sounds, we can, at least, see some reasons for the association
of certain kinds of sounds with certain states of mind. A scream, for
instance, uttered by a young animal, or by one of the members of a
community, as a call for assistance, will naturally be loud, prolonged,
and high, so as to penetrate to a distance. For Helmholtz has shown[407]
that, owing to the shape of the internal cavity of the human ear and its
consequent power of resonance, high notes produce a particularly strong
impression. When male animals utter sounds in order to please the
females, they would naturally employ those which are sweet to the ears
of the species; and it appears that the same sounds are often pleasing
to widely different animals, owing to the similarity of their nervous
systems, as we ourselves perceive in the singing of birds and even in
the chirping of certain tree-frogs giving us pleasure. On the other
hand, sounds produced in order to strike terror into an enemy, would
naturally be harsh or displeasing.

Whether the principle of antithesis has come into play with sounds, as
might perhaps have been expected, is doubtful. The interrupted, laughing
or tittering sounds made by man and by various kinds of monkeys when
pleased, are as different as possible from the prolonged screams of
these animals when distressed. The deep grunt of satisfaction uttered
by a pig, when pleased with its food, is widely different from its harsh
scream of pain or terror. But with the dog, as lately remarked, the
bark of anger and that of joy are sounds which by no means stand in
opposition to each other; and so it is in some other cases.

There is another obscure point, namely, whether the sounds which are
produced under various states of the mind determine the shape of the
mouth, or whether its shape is not determined by independent causes, and
the sound thus modified. When young infants cry they open their mouths
widely, and this, no doubt, is necessary for pouring forth a full volume
of sound; but the mouth then assumes, from a quite distinct cause, an
almost quadrangular shape, depending, as will hereafter be explained, on
the firm closing of the eyelids, and consequent drawing up of the upper
lip. How far this square shape of the mouth modifies the wailing or
crying sound, I am not prepared to say; but we know from the researches
of Helmholtz and others that the form of the cavity of the mouth and
lips determines the nature and pitch of the vowel sounds which are
produced.

It will also be shown in a future chapter that, under the feeling of
contempt or disgust, there is a tendency, from intelligible causes, to
blow out of the mouth or nostrils, and this produces sounds like pooh
or pish. When any one is startled or suddenly astonished, there is an
instantaneous tendency, likewise from an intelligible cause, namely, to
be ready for prolonged exertion, to open the mouth widely, so as to draw
a deep and rapid inspiration. When the next full expiration follows,
the mouth is slightly closed, and the lips, from causes hereafter to be
discussed, are somewhat protruded; and this form of the mouth, if the
voice be at all exerted, produces, according to Helmholtz, the sound of
the vowel _O_. Certainly a deep sound of a prolonged _Oh!_ may be
heard from a whole crowd of people immediately after witnessing any
astonishing spectacle. If, together with surprise, pain be felt, there
is a tendency to contract all the muscles of the body, including those
of the face, and the lips will then be drawn back; and this will perhaps
account for the sound becoming higher and assuming the character of
_Ah!_ or _Ach!_ As fear causes all the muscles of the body to tremble,
the voice naturally becomes tremulous, and at the same time husky from
the dryness of the mouth, owing to the salivary glands failing to act.
Why the laughter of man and the tittering of monkeys should be a rapidly
reiterated sound, cannot be explained. During the utterance of these
sounds, the mouth is transversely elongated by the corners being drawn
backwards and upwards; and of this fact an explanation will be attempted
in a future chapter. But the whole subject of the differences of the
sounds produced under different states of the mind is so obscure, that I
have succeeded in throwing hardly any light on it; and the remarks which
I have made, have but little significance.

[Illustration: Sound producing quills from tail of a porcupine. Fig. 11]

All the sounds hitherto noticed depend on the respiratory organs; but
sounds produced by wholly different means are likewise expressive.
Rabbits stamp loudly on the ground as a signal to their comrades; and
if a man knows how to do so properly, he may on a quiet evening hear the
rabbits answering him all around. These animals, as well as some others,
also stamp on the ground when made angry. Porcupines rattle their quills
and vibrate their tails when angered; and one behaved in this manner
when a live snake was placed in its compartment. The quills
on the tail are very different from those on the body: they are short,
hollow, thin like a goose-quill, with their ends transversely truncated,
so that they are open; they are supported on long, thin, elastic
foot-stalks. Now, when the tail is rapidly shaken, these hollow quills
strike against each other and produce, as I heard in the presence of Mr.
Bartlett, a peculiar continuous sound. We can, I think, understand
why porcupines have been provided, through the modification of their
protective spines, with this special sound-producing instrument. They
are nocturnal animals, and if they scented or heard a prowling beast of
prey, it would be a great advantage to them in the dark to give warning
to their enemy what they were, and that they were furnished with
dangerous spines. They would thus escape being attacked. They are, as
I may add, so fully conscious of the power of their weapons, that when
enraged they will charge backwards with their spines erected, yet still
inclined backwards.

Many birds during their courtship produce diversified sounds by means of
specially adapted feathers. Storks, when excited, make a loud clattering
noise with their beaks. Some snakes produce a grating or rattling noise.
Many insects stridulate by rubbing together specially modified parts of
their hard integuments. This stridulation generally serves as a
sexual charm or call; but it is likewise used to express different
emotions.[408] Every one who has attended to bees knows that their
humming changes when they are angry; and this serves as a warning that
there is danger of being stung. I have made these few remarks because
some writers have laid so much stress on the vocal and respiratory
organs as having been specially adapted for expression, that it was
advisable to show that sounds otherwise produced serve equally well for
the same purpose.

_Erection of the dermal appendages_.--Hardly any expressive movement is
so general as the involuntary erection of the hairs, feathers and
other dermal appendages; for it is common throughout three of the great
vertebrate classes. These appendages are erected under the excitement
of anger or terror; more especially when these emotions are combined, or
quickly succeed each other. The action serves to make the animal appear
larger and more frightful to its enemies or rivals, and is generally
accompanied by various voluntary movements adapted for the same purpose,
and by the utterance of savage sounds. Mr. Bartlett, who has had such
wide experience with animals of all kinds, does not doubt that this is
the case; but it is a different question whether the power of erection
was primarily acquired for this special purpose.

I will first give a considerable body of facts showing how general this
action is with mammals, birds and reptiles; retaining what I have to
say in regard to man for a future chapter. Mr. Sutton, the intelligent
keeper in the Zoological Gardens, carefully observed for me the
Chimpanzee and Orang; and he states that when they are suddenly
frightened, as by a thunderstorm, or when they are made angry, as by
being teased, their hair becomes erect. I saw a chimpanzee who was
alarmed at the sight of a black coalheaver, and the hair rose all over
his body; he made little starts forward as if to attack the man,
without any real intention of doing so, but with the hope, as the keeper
remarked, of frightening him. The Gorilla, when enraged, is described by
Mr. Ford[409] as having his crest of hair "erect and projecting forward,
his nostrils dilated, and his under lip thrown down; at the same time
uttering his characteristic yell, designed, it would seem, to terrify
his antagonists." I saw the hair on the Anubis baboon, when angered
bristling along the back, from the neck to the loins, but not on
the rump or other parts of the body. I took a stuffed snake into the
monkey-house, and the hair on several of the species instantly became
erect; especially on their tails, as I particularly noticed with the
_Cereopithecus nictitans_. Brehm states[410] that the _Midas aedipus_
(belonging to the American division) when excited erects its mane, in
order, as he adds, to make itself as frightful as possible.

With the Carnivora the erection of the hair seems to be almost
universal, often accompanied by threatening movements, the uncovering of
the teeth and the utterance of savage growls. In the Herpestes, I have
seen the hair on end over nearly the whole body, including the tail; and
the dorsal crest is erected in a conspicuous manner by the Hyaena and
Proteles. The enraged lion erects his mane. The bristling of the hair
along the neck and back of the dog, and over the whole body of the
cat, especially on the tail, is familiar to every one. With the cat it
apparently occurs only under fear; with the dog, under anger and fear;
but not, as far as I have observed, under abject fear, as when a dog is
going to be flogged by a severe gamekeeper. If, however, the dog shows
fight, as sometimes happens, up goes his hair. I have often noticed that
the hair of a dog is particularly liable to rise, if he is half angry
and half afraid, as on beholding some object only indistinctly seen in
the dusk.

I have been assured by a veterinary surgeon that he has often seen the
hair erected on horses and cattle, on which he had operated and was
again going to operate. When I showed a stuffed snake to a Peccary, the
hair rose in a wonderful manner along its back; and so it does with
the boar when enraged. An Elk which gored a man to death in the United
States, is described as first brandishing his antlers, squealing with
rage and stamping on the ground; "at length his hair was seen to rise
and stand on end," and then he plunged forward to the attack.[411] The
hair likewise becomes erect on goats, and, as I hear from Mr. Blyth, on
some Indian antelopes. I have seen it erected on the hairy Ant-eater;
and on the Agouti, one of the Rodents. A female Bat,[412] which reared
her young under confinement, when any one looked into the cage "erected
the fur on her back, and bit viciously at intruding fingers."

Birds belonging to all the chief Orders ruffle their feathers when angry
or frightened. Every one must have seen two cocks, even quite young
birds, preparing to fight with erected neck-hackles; nor can these
feathers when erected serve as a means of defence, for cock-fighters
have found by experience that it is advantageous to trim them. The male
Ruff (_Machetes pugnax_) likewise erects its collar of feathers when
fighting. When a dog approaches a common hen with her chickens, she
spreads out her wings, raises her tail, ruffles all her feathers, and
looking as ferocious as possible, dashes at the intruder. The tail is
not always held in exactly the same position; it is sometimes so much
erected, that the central feathers, as in the accompanying drawing,
almost touch the back. Swans, when angered, likewise raise their wings
and tail, and erect their feathers. They open their beaks, and make by
paddling little rapid starts forwards, against any one who approaches
the water's edge too closely. Tropic birds[413] when disturbed on their
nests are said not to fly away, but "merely to stick out their feathers
and scream." The Barn-owl, when approached "instantly swells out its
plumage, extends its wings and tail, hisses and clacks its mandibles
with force and rapidity."[414] So do other kinds of owls. Hawks, as I am
informed by Mr. Jenner Weir, likewise ruffle their feathers, and spread
out their wings and tail under similar circumstances. Some kinds of
parrots erect their feathers; and I have seen this action in the
Cassowary, when angered at the sight of an Ant-eater. Young cuckoos in
the nest, raise their feathers, open their mouths widely, and make
themselves as frightful as possible.

[Illustration: Hen driving away a dog from her chickens. Fig. 12]

{illust. caption = FIG. 12--Hen driving away a dog from her chickens.
Drawn from life by Mr. Wood.}

[Illustration: Swan driving away an intruder. Fig 13]

{illust. caption = FIG. 13.--Swan driving away an intruder. Drawn from
life by Mr. Wood.}

Small birds, also, as I hear from Mr. Weir, such as various finches,
buntings and warblers, when angry, ruffle all their feathers, or only
those round the neck; or they spread out their wings and tail-feathers.
With their plumage in this state, they rush at each other with open
beaks and threatening gestures. Mr. Weir concludes from his large
experience that the erection of the feathers is caused much more by
anger than by fear. He gives as an instance a hybrid goldfinch of a most
irascible disposition, which when approached too closely by a servant,
instantly assumes the appearance of a ball of ruffled feathers. He
believes that birds when frightened, as a general rule, closely adpress
all their feathers, and their consequently diminished size is often
astonishing. As soon as they recover from their fear or surprise, the
first thing which they do is to shake out their feathers. The best
instances of this adpression of the feathers and apparent shrinking of
the body from fear, which Mr. Weir has noticed, has been in the quail
and grass-parrakeet.[415] The habit is intelligible in these birds from
their being accustomed, when in danger, either to squat on the ground or
to sit motionless on a branch, so as to escape detection. Though, with
birds, anger may be the chief and commonest cause of the erection of the
feathers, it is probable that young cuckoos when looked at in the nest,
and a hen with her chickens when approached by a dog, feel at least some
terror. Mr. Tegetmeier informs me that with game-cocks, the erection of
the feathers on the head has long been recognized in the cock-pit as a
sign of cowardice.

The males of some lizards, when fighting together during their
courtship, expand their throat pouches or frills, and erect their dorsal
crests.[416] But Dr. Gunther does not believe that they can erect their
separate spines or scales.

We thus see how generally throughout the two higher vertebrate classes,
and with some reptiles, the dermal appendages are erected under the
influence of anger and fear. The movement is effected, as we know
from Kolliker's interesting discovery, by the contraction of minute,
unstriped, involuntary muscles,[417] often called _arrectores pili_,
which are attached to the capsules of the separate hairs, feathers, &c.
By the contraction of these muscles the hairs can be instantly erected,
as we see in a dog, being at the same time drawn a little out of their
sockets; they are afterwards quickly depressed. The vast number of these
minute muscles over the whole body of a hairy quadruped is astonishing.
The erection of the hair is, however, aided in some cases, as with
that on the head of a man, by the striped and voluntary muscles of the
underlying _panniculus carnosus_. It is by the action of these latter
muscles, that the hedgehog erects its spines. It appears, also, from the
researches of Leydig[418] and others, that striped fibres extend from
the panniculus to some of the larger hairs, such as the vibrissae of
certain quadrupeds. The _arrectores pili_ contract not only under the
above emotions, but from the application of cold to the surface.
I remember that my mules and dogs, brought from a lower and warmer
country, after spending a night on the bleak Cordillera, had the hair
all over their bodies as erect as under the greatest terror. We see the
same action in our own _goose-skin_ during the chill before a fever-fit.
Mr. Lister has also found,[419] that tickling a neighbouring part of the
skin causes the erection and protrusion of the hairs.

From these facts it is manifest that the erection of the dermal
appendages is a reflex action, independent of the will; and this action
must be looked at, when, occurring under the influence of anger or
fear, not as a power acquired for the sake of some advantage, but as an
incidental result, at least to a large extent, of the sensorium being
affected. The result, in as far as it is incidental, may be compared
with the profuse sweating from an agony of pain or terror. Nevertheless,
it is remarkable how slight an excitement often suffices to cause the
hair to become erect; as when two dogs pretend to fight together in
play. We have, also, seen in a large number of animals, belonging to
widely distinct classes, that the erection of the hair or feathers is
almost always accompanied by various voluntary movements--by threatening
gestures, opening the mouth, uncovering the teeth, spreading out of the
wings and tail by birds, and by the utterance of harsh sounds; and the
purpose of these voluntary movements is unmistakable. Therefore it seems
hardly credible that the co-ordinated erection of the dermal appendages,
by which the animal is made to appear larger and more terrible to its
enemies or rivals, should be altogether an incidental and purposeless
result of the disturbance of the sensorium. This seems almost as
incredible as that the erection by the hedgehog of its spines, or of
the quills by the porcupine, or of the ornamental plumes by many birds
during their courtship, should all be purposeless actions.

We here encounter a great difficulty. How can the contraction of the
unstriped and involuntary _arrectores pili_ have been co-ordinated with
that of various voluntary muscles for the same special purpose? If
we could believe that the arrectores primordially had been voluntary
muscles, and had since lost their stripes and become involuntary, the
case would be comparatively simple. I am not, however, aware that there
is any evidence in favour of this view; although the reversed transition
would not have presented any great difficulty, as the voluntary muscles
are in an unstriped condition in the embryos of the higher animals, and
in the larvae of some crustaceans. Moreover in the deeper layers of the
skin of adult birds, the muscular network is, according to Leydig,[420]
in a transitional condition; the fibres exhibiting only indications of
transverse striation.

Another explanation seems possible. We may admit that originally the
_arrectores pili_ were slightly acted on in a direct manner, under the
influence of rage and terror, by the disturbance of the nervous system;
as is undoubtedly the case with our so-called _goose-skin_ before a
fever-fit. Animals have been repeatedly excited by rage and terror
during many generations; and consequently the direct effects of the
disturbed nervous system on the dermal appendages will almost
certainly have been increased through habit and through the tendency
of nerve-force to pass readily along accustomed channels. We shall
find this view of the force of habit strikingly confirmed in a future
chapter, where it will be shown that the hair of the insane is affected
in an extraordinary manner, owing to their repeated accesses of fury
and terror. As soon as with animals the power of erection had thus
been strengthened or increased, they must often have seen the hairs
or feathers erected in rival and enraged males, and the bulk of their
bodies thus increased. In this case it appears possible that they might
have wished to make themselves appear larger and more terrible to their
enemies, by voluntarily assuming a threatening attitude and uttering
harsh cries; such attitudes and utterances after a time becoming through
habit instinctive. In this manner actions performed by the contraction
of voluntary muscles might have been combined for the same special
purpose with those effected by involuntary muscles. It is even possible
that animals, when excited and dimly conscious of some change in the
state of their hair, might act on it by repeated exertions of their
attention and will; for we have reason to believe that the will is
able to influence in an obscure manner the action of some unstriped or
involuntary muscles, as in the period of the peristaltic movements
of the intestines, and in the contraction of the bladder. Nor must we
overlook the part which variation and natural selection may have played;
for the males which succeeded in making themselves appear the most
terrible to their rivals, or to their other enemies, if not of
overwhelming power, will on an average have left more offspring to
inherit their characteristic qualities, whatever these may be and
however first acquired, than have other males.

_The inflation of the body, and other means of exciting fear in an
enemy_.--Certain Amphibians and Reptiles, which either have no spines
to erect, or no muscles by which they can be erected, enlarge themselves
when alarmed or angry by inhaling air. This is well known to be the case
with toads and frogs. The latter animal is made, in AEsop's fable of
the 'Ox and the Frog,' to blow itself up from vanity and envy until
it burst. This action must have been observed during the most ancient
times, as, according to Mr. Hensleigh Wedgwood,[421] the word _toad_
expresses in all the languages of Europe the habit of swelling. It has
been observed with some of the exotic species in the Zoological Gardens;
and Dr. Gunther believes that it is general throughout the group.
Judging from analogy, the primary purpose probably was to make the body
appear as large and frightful as possible to an enemy; but another, and
perhaps more important secondary advantage is thus gained. When frogs
are seized by snakes, which are their chief enemies, they enlarge
themselves wonderfully; so that if the snake be of small size, as Dr.
Gunther informs me, it cannot swallow the frog, which thus escapes being
devoured.

Chameleons and some other lizards inflate themselves when angry. Thus
a species inhabiting Oregon, the _Tapaya Douglasii_, is slow in its
movements and does not bite, but has a ferocious aspect; "when irritated
it springs in a most threatening manner at anything pointed at it, at
the same time opening its mouth wide and hissing audibly, after which it
inflates its body, and shows other marks of anger."[422]

Several kinds of snakes likewise inflate themselves when irritated.
The puff-adder (_Clotho arietans_) is remarkable in this respect; but
I believe, after carefully watching these animals, that they do not
act thus for the sake of increasing their apparent bulk, but simply
for inhaling a large supply of air, so as to produce their surprisingly
loud, harsh, and prolonged hissing sound. The Cobras-de-capello, when
irritated, enlarge themselves a little, and hiss moderately; but, at
the same time they lift their heads aloft, and dilate by means of their
elongated anterior ribs, the skin on each side of the neck into a large
flat disk,--the so-called hood. With their widely opened mouths, they
then assume a terrific aspect. The benefit thus derived ought to be
considerable, in order to compensate for the somewhat lessened rapidity
(though this is still great) with which, when dilated, they can strike
at their enemies or prey; on the same principle that a broad, thin piece
of wood cannot be moved through the air so quickly as a small round
stick. An innocuous snake, the _Trovidonotus macrophthalmus_, an
inhabitant of India, likewise dilates its neck when irritated;
and consequently is often mistaken for its compatriot, the deadly
Cobra.[423] This resemblance perhaps serves as some protection to the
Tropidonotus.

Another innocuous species, the Dasypeltis of South Africa, blows itself
out, distends its neck, hisses and darts at an intruder.[424] Many other
snakes hiss under similar circumstances. They also rapidly vibrate
their protruded tongues; and this may aid in increasing their terrific
appearance.

Snakes possess other means of producing sounds besides hissing. Many
years ago I observed in South America that a venomous Trigonocephalus,
when disturbed, rapidly vibrated the end of its tail, which striking
against the dry grass and twigs produced a rattling noise that could be
distinctly heard at the distance of six feet.[425] The deadly and fierce
_Echis carinata_ of India produces "a curious prolonged, almost hissing
sound in a very different manner, namely by rubbing the sides of the
folds of its body against each other," whilst the head remains in almost
the same position. The scales on the sides, and not on other parts of
the body, are strongly keeled, with the keels toothed like a saw; and as
the coiled-up animal rubs its sides together, these grate against each
other.[426] Lastly, we have the well-known case of the Rattle-snake. He
who has merely shaken the rattle of a dead snake, can form no just idea
of the sound produced by the living animal. Professor Shaler states that
it is indistinguishable from that made by the male of a large Cicada
(an Homopterous insect), which inhabits the same district.[427] In the
Zoological Gardens, when the rattle-snakes and puff-adders were greatly
excited at the same time, I was much struck at the similarity of the
sound produced by them; and although that made by the rattle-snake
is louder and shriller than the hissing of the puff-adder, yet when
standing at some yards distance I could scarcely distinguish the two.
For whatever purpose the sound is produced by the one species, I can
hardly doubt that it serves for the same purpose in the other species;
and I conclude from the threatening gestures made at the same time by
many snakes, that their hissing,--the rattling of the rattle-snake and
of the tail of the Trigonocephalus,--the grating of the scales of the
Echis,--and the dilatation of the hood of the Cobra,--all subserve the
same end, namely, to make them appear terrible to their enemies.[428]

