                              CHAPTER I.
                           HABITS OF WORMS.
Nature of the sites inhabited—Can live long under                 7–15
water—Nocturnal—Wander about at night—Often lie close
to the mouths of their burrows, and are thus destroyed
in large numbers by birds—Structure—Do not possess
eyes, but can distinguish between light and
darkness—Retreat rapidly when brightly illuminated, not
by a reflex action—Power of attention—Sensitive to heat
and cold—Completely deaf—Sensitive to vibrations and to
touch—Feeble power of smell—Taste—Mental
qualities—Nature of food—Omnivorous—Digestion—Leaves
before being swallowed, moistened with a fluid of the
nature of the pancreatic secretion—Extra-stomachal
digestion—Calciferous glands, structure of—Calcareous
concretions formed in the anterior pair of glands—The
calcareous matter primarily an excretion, but
secondarily serves to neutralise the acids generated
during the digestive process.
                             CHAPTER II.
                     HABITS OF WORMS—_continued_.
Manner in which worms seize objects—Their power of              52–120
suction—The instinct of plugging up the mouths of their
burrows—Stones piled over the burrows—The advantages
thus gained—Intelligence shown by worms in their manner
of plugging up their burrows—Various kinds of leaves
and other objects thus used—Triangles of paper—Summary
of reasons for believing that worms exhibit some
intelligence—Means by which they excavate their
burrows, by pushing away the earth and swallowing
it—Earth also swallowed for the nutritious matter which
it contains—Depth to which worms burrow, and the
construction of their burrows—Burrows lined with
castings, and in the upper part with leaves—The lowest
part paved with little stones or seeds—Manner in which
the castings are ejected—The collapse of old
burrows—Distribution of worms—Tower-like castings in
Bengal—Gigantic castings on the Nilgiri
Mountains—Castings ejected in all countries.
                             CHAPTER III.
     THE AMOUNT OF FINE EARTH BROUGHT UP BY WORMS TO THE SURFACE.
Rate at which various objects strewed on the surface of        121–163
grass-fields are covered up by the castings of
worms—The burial of a paved path—The slow subsidence of
great stones left on the surface—The number of worms
which live within a given space—The weight of earth
ejected from a burrow, and from all the burrows within
a given space—The thickness of the layer of mould which
the castings on a given space would form within a given
time if uniformly spread out—The slow rate at which
mould can increase to a great thickness—Conclusion.
                             CHAPTER IV.
 THE PART WHICH WORMS HAVE PLAYED IN THE BURIAL OF ANCIENT BUILDINGS.
The accumulation of rubbish on the sites of great              164–208
cities independent of the action of worms—The burial of
a Roman villa at Abinger—The floors and walls
penetrated by worms—Subsidence of a modern pavement—The
buried pavement at Beaulieu Abbey—Roman villas at
Chedworth and Brading—The remains of the Roman town at
Silchester—The nature of the débris by which the
remains are covered—The penetration of the tesselated
floors and walls by worms—Subsidence of the
floors—Thickness of the mould—The old Roman city of
Wroxeter—Thickness of the mould—Depth of the
foundations of some of the Buildings—Conclusion.
                              CHAPTER V.
          THE ACTION OF WORMS IN THE DENUDATION OF THE LAND.
Evidence of the amount of denudation which the land has        209–236
undergone—Sub-aerial denudation—The deposition of
dust—Vegetable mould, its dark colour and fine texture
largely due to the action of worms—The disintegration
of rocks by the humus-acids—Similar acids apparently
generated within the bodies of worms—The action of
these acids facilitated by the continued movement of
the particles of earth—A thick bed of mould checks the
disintegration of the underlying soil and rocks.
Particles of stone worn or triturated in the gizzards
of worms—Swallowed stones serve as mill-stones—The
levigated state of the castings—Fragments of brick in
the castings over ancient buildings well rounded.  The
triturating power of worms not quite insignificant
under a geological point of view.
